start question
life-insurance
What Is CMFG Life Insurance ?
CMFG Life Insurance goes by the marketing name , CUNA Mutual Group . CMFG Life Insurance Company 's products go by the marketing brand , TruStage . TruStage life insurance policies are offered to credit union members as a benefit of membership in that credit union . They offer Term and Whole Life and Accidental Death policies .
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
CMFG Life Insurance goes by the marketing name , CUNA Mutual Group . CMFG Life Insurance Company 's products go by the marketing brand , TruStage . TruStage life insurance policies are offered to credit union members as a benefit of membership in that credit union . They offer Term and Whole Life and Accidental Death policies .
CMFG Life insurance goes under the marketing name , CUNA Mutual Group and CUNIS Insurance Society , Inc They sell a life insurance product called TruStage through the venue of credit unions . The initials CMFG do not apparently have any meaning , at least that was ever made known to the public .
The initials CMFG apparently do not have a meaning that has been made publicly known . They use the marketing name CUNA Mutual Group , which is a company that sells insurance products through credit unions . If you have a policy with the title , `` TruStage '' , it was most likely purchased through a credit union and may show the charge from CMFG .
Having no luck finding anything with a search on CMFG , I followed a hunch and tried `` CUNA Mutual Financial Group '' . Per this web page , WEBSITELINK it appears to me that CMFG does stand for CUNA Mutual Financial Group , Inc. . Hopefully this will help you research the company on a deeper level .
That is an excellent question , and one that took some work to find for you ! The initials CMFG stand for CUNA Mutual Financial Group , according to the very nice operator I spoke with . CMFG is the parent company of CUNA , which is the parent company of Globe Life , where your policy was written . Globe will still pay you out when your claim is filed , but your monthly check is going to the parent company 's bank account . While things normally will roll downhill , apparently their premium payments roll uphill first ! I hope that sets your mind at ease , they seem like a solid company , and if they are all as good as that operator was , you 're in good hands . Have an awesome day , and thank you for asking !
CMFG Lif Insurance Company provides financial services and insurance/protection products to credit unions and their members , and to customers worldwide . CUNA Mutual Group is the marketing name for CMFG Life Insurance Company and its affiliates and subsidiaries . TruStage is the marketing brand for the life insurance products issued by CMFG Life Insurance Company .
I could not find any indication that Globe Life is associated with CMFG , but called Globe Life to confirm . Their representative said that if your policy is with Globe Life , your statement should say Globe Life . It may be that you have a policy with `` globe '' in the product title , or got your policy through Global Credit Union ?
Without knowing your age and the cost per thousand for your current life insurance , we can not calculate how much coverage you already have with CMFG . You can contact the Langley Federal Credit Union to inquire , or see this website to ask about making a change to your policy . WEBSITELINK
As far as I know , CMFG is not a short abbreviation for a full name . They are the parent to CUNA Mutual Group so it could very well stand for that , however , their website does not appear to describe it this way . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other insurance-related questions . Thanks very much .
Believe it or not , CMFG does not have any actual meaning . CMFG life insurance company is the parent of all organizations that make up CUNA Mutual Group . It could be CUNA Mutual Financial Group , however you will not find this on their website . This insurance company is headquartered in Iowa .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
A nearly impossible question to answer . How much premium can you afford ? What carrier are you purchasing coverage with ? What is your health/medical history ? What is your family/medical history ? What is your occupation ? What is your geographic location ? What is you age ? What is you height/weight ? These are just some of the factors used to determine the amount of coverage and the premium that you would pay for that coverage ; that a carrier might use . Most carriers will handle coverage rates up to one million on a regular basis . Contact a local agent to find out what would be available to you .
here is a good chance you will . Lets cover some of the what ifs : What if you need to maximize your pension distribution by taking it out during your lifetime only ? Life insurance will help you cover your spouse . What if you have any remaining debts , such as a second mortgage ? Or if you have any dependents , such as a child who still need some financial assistance ? Life insurance would protect them . What if you want a really strong guaranteed portion of your asset portfolio ? The guarantees in life insurance cash value contracts are very competitive . What if your net worth is high and you want to preserve your estate from federal and state taxation ? Life insurance would allow you to protect your assets and still pay the government . What if you have formed very strong ties with a charity , and would like to support it as a legacy ? Life insurance can turn a comparatively small premium into a very substantial gift for them . Its kind of surprising , isnt it , about how our need for life insurance can basically last our entire life !
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Do Car Insurance Rates Go Up ?
Your state insurance commissioner is charged with making sure that the auto insurers in your state pay claims . If the insurance company has higher claims than their premium income they must increase future premiums to cover anticipated future losses . The reason that these costs increase is obvious , increased cost of repair , frequency of accidents , and litigation . Your own record can make the company increase the rates on your car .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of reasons why your insurance would go up . The first is that your driving record took a hit , maybe through an accident or traffic ticket . Your increased risk as a driver would translate into a higher premium . The other would be the company 's desire to maintain its profitability . If they have higher costs , they are n't likely to work at cutting those costs , most often they pass them on to us . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
That is a great question ! The better question though , is why would you want to ? I could maybe , possibly , barely , almostsee why if she were still driving the car ; if she had policies that bundled with yours and kept your rates low , or if she were making the payments . But she is n't going to be legally obligated to you anymore , and if she 's not going to be driving the car , probably is going to stop paying , drop you from her policies , and not care too much if your car gets a new dent or scratch . I 'm not suggesting in any way that your Ex is in any kind of way a bad person , or doing anything wrong . That is just the way it is . It may be better to just let that one go , and let her find a policy that will work best for her . If you 'd like to discuss this privately , please contact me , okay ? Good luck , and thanks for asking !
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
I agree with Cathy , but also offer one other major reason rates go up . Insurers are pricing a product before they know their cost . It something like building a spec house for sale at $ 300,000 with out knowing that the purchaser is going to require all hard wood floors , a finished basement and a three car garage . Had you known you would have priced your product at $ 400,000 . This is some of the dilemma of insurers . Thy can look at historical outcomes and yet may not see a trend developing before it happens . The reason most auto insurance is sold in Six month terms in the US , is that it often takes a minimum of one year for the carrier to realize rate level on all customers in a certain state and rate filing . Let me give an example : If company A sees it needs rate increase on its TX auto insurance business and puts that rate into effect after state approval on July 1,2014 it will take a full six months to raise the rate level to the new level for the last customer whose policy incepts on 12/31/2014 . Then it takes the company another 6 months to earn the premium for each of those customers . It has to set aside some money in case you decide to move your business , as well as keep reserves for accidents that have occurred or are known to be likely to occur in the future.So in a full year at 7/1/2015 the company has realized the effects of its rate filing in the state . If it now needs more funds , it will take the same 12 months to fully earn that premium . So in effect you can see that the process of getting an adequate rate for an insurers losses and expected losses is at least a year on six month polices and double that to two years to achieve the rate level on annual policies . That said , recognize that your rates can go up annually in a 12 month policy because of a company 's filings and go up as much as every six months for an insurer who uses 6 moth policies.So , all that said , you do n't control the pricing that is an aggregate need of the insurer but you can better protect yourself by buying a 12 month policy . Lock in a rate level . If you do not change the exposure -LRB- new car or new operators and such -RRB- , you will have locked in rate for one whole year . So my advice is to seek out an insurer that writes annual policies if available .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
That is a great question ! A lot of people have a hard time with the concept of insurance . I 'm young , nothing will happen to me ! Or I 'm a good driver , why do I need insurance ? But inevitably things do happen . You can be the best driver ever , but that does n't mean the teenager texting in the car behind you is ; or that something can go wrong , and you 're laid up in the hospital . Homeowners is the same way . No one thinks that things will go wrong with their house , why would I want it ? Insurance is there to protect you when things do go wrong . You would not think the insurance was a waste of money when you got the check to replace your belongings , or the one that allows you to pay for the hotel rooms that you are forced into when your home is damaged . Insurance is only a waste of money when you drastically undervalue it . Please consider it as protection , and not a waste . Thanks for asking !
I assume that you mean failed as in `` did not pay what it guaranteed '' . Annuities are backed by the claims paying ability of the Insurance company that issued the policy . This is why it is very important to consider the financial rating of the company you use . Since 2008 , there have only been 3 `` B '' rated insurance companies that have failed . There have been more C , D , & E rated companies that have failed , but not many . And most of the ones that did were D rated or worse . Since 2008 there have been no B + or better companies that have failed . -LRB- Actually its longer than that , but the records I currently have access to only go back that far . But I am not personally aware of any insurance companies that were A rated at time of failure -RRB- This is why most agents recommend using a B + , or better yet , an A rated company . It is also important to point out that just because an insurance company fails , does not mean the annuity fails to pay . Insurance companies are highly regulated . And the states all have a safety net type system set up to help secure the guarantees made by failing insurance companies . Visit WEBSITELINK for more info on what happens in the event of an insolvency . But it is important to remember that whatever safety net might exist . It is no substitute for a solid financial rating . There are way too many well rated companies to use a poorly rated one .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Great Question on classic car insurance . Normally classic car insurance offers limited use on the car or miles so the insurance company has a restriction on the use of the car . You have to have a second car to drive on a daily basis to quality for classic car insurance so that is why the premium is less on that type of insurance .
There are several reasons auto insurance goes up ... Unfortunately some of those reasons may have absolutely nothing to do with you . Remember , all insurance is is a big pool of money . Policy holders are grouped together and pay premiums into the pool . When a claim happens , money is pulled out of the pool . If too much money is pulled out , then more money has to be put in so premiums go up ... I know this is a very simplistic explanation and the realty is much more complex , but it is a fact that if a bunch of other people in your `` pool '' -LRB- your state or region -RRB- experience a lot of acidents or other losses - the rates for everyone in that `` pool '' are going up no matter if you have had an accicent , ticket or anything else . Of course , there are individual reasons why you premiums coud be going up based on your driving record , personal characteristics , etc. . Give your agent a call and they should be able to break your premium down and explain what part of an increase pertains to you specifically and what part is a rate increase by the carrier .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance ? Well , generally speaking , it takes about 60 days . You 're going to have to fill out an application . You 're going to have to take a paramed exam . They 're going to order attending physician statements from your doctor . So when you do full underwriting , it takes between 60 days , and sometimes , depending upon if the carrier is very popular , it could take longer , up to 90 days . Keep in mind , if you do n't want to go through the full underwriting process , you could do simplified issue or you could do guaranteed issue . That would cut the time down . What you 're giving up by doing that is , without full underwriting , you 're just going to be used ... the boilerplate that they 're going to use for simplified and guaranteed is not going to be as cutting edge from a price point of view . You 'll probably wind up paying a little bit more . But if you want to really expedite your issue and get your policy in place , those two ideas could be a way to go .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Great question . The way auto policies are rated today includes a myriad of factors and that makes it difficult to predict premiums . The factors include the personal details of drivers , including their driving records and their credit reports and the year , make and model of the auto . You may be surprised to find that an `` expensive '' Lincoln costs less to insure than a `` less expensive '' compact car . Why ? Because little cars are more easily totaled in an accident and total loss claims are more expensive than simple repairs to a heavier vehicle ! In general if there are no changes to all the moving parts , you may expect your rate to be stable and perhaps go down over time if you have no claims . Another interesting factor is your carrier 's position in the local market . For example , in Florida there is a lot of market volatility and carriers come and go in the market . A new carrier may have aggressively low rates as they are eager to write more business and get market share . Going with that carrier may be a good deal for the first year or two , but you may well see big increases at renewal as the carrier adjusts their position in the market .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medicare Plan J ?
Medicare Plan J is a plan that is no longer offered . The people who have Plan J can keep that plan the rest of their life if they want to . The current Plan F would be today 's equivalent . For those people who have Plan J it is important to get a Medicare Supplement review to determine if they can get similar benefits for less money . The premiums on Plan J could increase over time because that plan is no longer taking on new customers . The only way for it to generate revenue is to increase the premium to cover increasing medical expenses on a aging block of business .
Medicare Supplement Plan J was a good plan , however , it is no longer offered in any state . Medicare Supplement Insurance Plans can not vary by state . If they stop offering Plan J in one state then they stop in all states . Any person who still has a Plan J can keep that plan the rest of their life if they would like . However , with no new premium coming in from new customers the only way insurance companies can deal with rising healthcare costs will be to raise the premiums on Plan J . It would make sense for someone with Plan J to compare plans to see what is available . Plan F is the most similar to Plan J but Plan G is also something to consider .
Plan J was one of four plans dropped in June 2010 . The changes were made due to federal legislation passed in 2005 . Although four plans were dropped , two new plans were added resulting in a total of 10 standardized plans -- the original number mandated by Congress in 1990 to simplify and standardize all policies that supplement Medicare . Medigap Plans E , H , I , and J are no longer sold ; however , if you already have one in place , you can keep it . As for current standardized plans , Plan F took the spot for Plan J. Like Plan J , Plan F covers all Medicare approved charges . You do n't have to pay any co-payments , deductibles , or co-insurance . If you have Plan J and your premium is getting uncomfortably high , it might be a good idea to compare premiums to Plan F or any of the other standardized plans available . I hope this answer was helpful . If I can be of further assistance , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 .
Medicare Plan J is a plan that is no longer offered . The people who have Plan J can keep that plan the rest of their life if they want to . The current Plan F would be today 's equivalent . For those people who have Plan J it is important to get a Medicare Supplement review to determine if they can get similar benefits for less money . The premiums on Plan J could increase over time because that plan is no longer taking on new customers . The only way for it to generate revenue is to increase the premium to cover increasing medical expenses on a aging block of business .
Plan J was a Medicare Supplement plan that offered prescription coverage . This plan is no longer available to purchase as of June 2011 . It was a very comprehensive plan . The closest you can purchase to Plan J today is Plan F with a separate Prescription Drug Plan . If you had a Plan J you may have been grandfathered however the Prescription coverage in Plan J was eliminated .
Plan J is a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available in the Medigap marketplace - in short , it was a plan F that included prescription drug coverage . In June 2010 , rules regarding Medicare supplement plans were restructured and supplement plans could no longer include prescription drug coverage . Therefore , plans E , H , I , and J were no longer available for purchase . To get a similar plan structure today , you need to purchase a plan F and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . If you have an existing one that was already in force before the changes , you can keep it as Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Unfortunately , there is no such thing as Medicare Part J. Medicare consists of 4 parts - Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- , Part B -LRB- medical insurance -RRB- , Part C -LRB- Medicare advantage -RRB- , Part D -LRB- prescription drug coverage -RRB- . In addition to these 4 parts , there are also Medicare supplement programs available for individuals to provide coverage for the gaps in benefits that Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- do not cover . There used to be a Medicare Supplement Plan J , however , in 2010 , this plan was taken off the market along with plans E , H , and I .
I believe what you 're referring to is Plan E - it 's a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available in the Medigap marketplace - in short , it was a Medicare supplement plan that included prescription drug coverage . In June 2010 , rules regarding Medicare supplement plans were restructured and supplement plans could no longer include prescription drug coverage . Therefore , plans E , H , I , and J were no longer available for purchase . To get a similar plan structure today , you need to purchase either a plan F , G , or N -LRB- the most comparable Medigap plans to plan E -RRB- and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . If you have an existing one that was already in force before the changes , you can keep it as Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- . Plans E , H , I and J are no longer available to purchase . In some states , you may be able to buy a Medigap SELECT policy or a High-Deductible Plan F . The SELECT plans requires you to use specific hospitals . The deductible for High-Deductible Plan F is $ 2,140 in 2014 . Plans F , G , and N are widely sold by most Medicare Supplement insurance companies . They are popular with Medicare beneficiaries for various reasons . Plan F covers all Medicare approved charges . You are not responsible for paying any deductibles , co-pays or excess charges . Plan G is covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You have all the same benefits of Plan F after meeting the small deductible . Plan N covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You also have co-pays that are never more than $ 20 to any doctor/specialist who accepts Medicare . If you have more questions about Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 .
Plan H was a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available for purchase - this plan , along with plans E , I , and J were discontinued in June 2010 when the rules were changed so that prescription coverage could no longer be sold with a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- you now have to buy a separate stand-alone part D prescription drug plan -RRB- . Plan H is similar to plan G today , except plan H did not cover Part B excess charges -LRB- Plans F and G do -RRB- . Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable so if you had one before they were pulled from the market , you can still keep it.If you want to secure new coverage that offers more comprehensive benefits , you may want to look into a plan F -LRB- and add a Part D plan for prescription benefits -RRB- .
The first thing to consider is what is important to you . Do you want to minimize out of pocket expenses ? Do you want to be able to see a doctor without a referral ? Do you want the flexibility to see anyone you like ? All true Medigap Plans have a letter to tell you what plan it is -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan G , Plan J , etc. -RRB- . Any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medigap Plan . The best place to start is to call a independent insurance agent that specializes in Medigap Plans . They should be able to show you everything that is available to you in the market and help explain what all the different plans cover . It will save you weeks of research . We have taken it a step further . You can go to our website at SummitMedigap.com and compare Medigap Plans instantly online . We can help answer all your questions at 1-888-407-8664 .
I found your question to be really interesting . In some states Plan J has been discontiued . In researching your question I found an `` advisor '' on line that emphatically states , '' if you still have this type of policy you should change '' . Then it appears that the Plan J policy has a $ 2000 deductible that has to be paid before any benefits are paid . If this policy has a $ 2000 deductible then I tend to agree with the `` on-line advisor '' and you need to change to a policy that is more commonly sold by the main line companies involved in the medicare supplement business
A J code in Medicare is a code used to identify injectable drugs for purposes of billing . The type of injections for which these drugs can be used are intramuscular , subcutaneous , or IV . J codes are also used to designate the generic name and dosage of oral immunosuppressive drugs for billing purposes .
Plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan on the market and is very popular . However , depending on your specific needs you may be able save money and get almost identical benefits with a different Medigap Plan . All the Medigap Plans have a letter to tell you what plan it is such as Plan F , Plan J , Plan G , etc. . You will save a lot of time and money by working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Plans . They will represent all the major carriers and be able to give you unbiased advice to help you determine which is the best Medigap plan for your needs .
Medicare Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of the cost of your healthcare . In addition , the 20 % that you are responsible for does not have a limit . No max out of pocket or cap so if something major happens you could be left with a lot of very expensive medical bills . Millions of Americans age 65 and over buy a Medigap policy to cover what Medicare Part A & B does not . There are several plans to choose from but all Medigap Plans have a letter such as Plan F , Plan G , Plan J , etc. . If it does n't have a letter it 's not a Medigap Policy . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
That really depends on several factors . What might be a great Medigap Policy in one state may not be the best in another . Premiums can be different based on where you live and your smoking status . The benefits of all Medigap Plans will be the same . For example , Plan F at one carrier will have exactly the same benefits as the next carrier . However , there are several different plans you can pick and all will have a letter like Plan F , Plan G , Plan J , etc. . The best way to find out who has the best Medigap Policy for you is to contact an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Plans . They will be able to show you the plans from all the major carriers and you will be able to quickly answer that question .
Medicare is insurance coverage for `` medical care '' and does not cover the costs of assisted living facilities or long-term care facilities -LRB- custodial care -RRB- . Medicare will however cover qualified healthcare costs while a Medicare beneficiary is living at an assisted living facility . Medicare is more often used to pay for a skilled nursing facility or home health care . There are always exceptional circumstances that will allow Medicare to cover different types of care , for example , while in a qualified stay at a skilled nursing facility a Medicare beneficiary may also receive custodial care , but in most cases Medicare wont cover the costs of `` custodial care . '' In some states , Medicaid will pay for some of the costs associated with assisted livingif a qualified beneficiary has a limited income . Medicaid is designed to help seniors and some individuals with disabilities pay for healthcare when they are unable to pay for it themselves . Check on qualification requirements and available waiver programs for assisted living with your state Medicaid department . Individuals should seek out an extended care insurance specialist to understand options and formulate a plan to financially address assisted living or long term care needs before any such care may be needed . Jeffrey J. VanCleve 800-211-0017
Comparing Medigap Plans can be very time consuming and exhausting for people . Working with an independent agent will save you a lot of time and money . A good agent will be able to give you the bottom line of what is available to you and help you determine which plan meets your needs the best . All Medigap Plans will be identified by a letter such as Plan F , Plan J , Plan G , etc. . I would be happy to answer any questions you have in comparing your options .
No . In today 's marketplace , if you have/want to purchase a Medigap plan and want prescription drug coverage , you would need to enroll in a stand-alone Part D plan . These can be set-up during the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP -RRB- or if/when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- such as new to Medicare . Up until a few years ago , Medigap plans did offer prescription coverage under plans E , H , I , and J. Changes were made to the law that forced these plans to be taken off the market and would require you to buy prescription coverage through a stand-alone plan . If you purchased one of these plans before they were removed from the marketplace , you could keep them . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can I Have Medicare And HDHP ?
Normally , once you go on Medicare you can no longer keep your HDHP -LRB- high deductible health plan -RRB- because you generally can not have other health insurance along with an HDHP . However , Medicare Advantage plans allow for the creation of a Medicare Medical Savings Account -LRB- MSA -RRB- . Like HSA 's , MSA 's are comprised o a HDHP along with the MSA . This HDHP is a Medicare Advantage Plan with a high annual deductible .
Normally , once you go on Medicare you can no longer keep your HDHP -LRB- high deductible health plan -RRB- because you generally can not have other health insurance along with an HDHP . However , Medicare Advantage plans allow for the creation of a Medicare Medical Savings Account -LRB- MSA -RRB- . Like HSA 's , MSA 's are comprised o a HDHP along with the MSA . This HDHP is a Medicare Advantage Plan with a high annual deductible .
HDHP means high deductible health plan . The typical plan design does not have copay 's for doctor visits or prescription drugs . Policyholders that use par -LRB- network -RRB- providers pay the pre-negotiated rate for all covered services . The amounts paid for covered medical services accrue towards the deductible . HDHP policies are a simple , easy to understand concept . Unlike copay plans , there are no `` moving parts '' to the HDHP . Once the deductible is satisfied , all covered charges for the balance of the year are paid by the carrier -LRB- subject to coinsurance provisions -RRB- . Most plans offer 100 % coinsurance above the deductible but it is not unusual to see plans with 80 % , 70 % or 50 % coinsurance . The HDHP design is a requirement for those who want an HSA -LRB- health savings account -RRB- but not all HDHP 's are HSA compliant . Policyholders looking for good value and minimal risk exposure for catastrophic claims will choose the HDHP .
HDHP stands for High Deductible Health Plan . Generally , this term has been used in association with a type of health insurance policy purchased that was specifically designed to be used with a Health Savings Account -LRB- H.S.A -RRB- . In this context the health insurance plan design has an upfront deductible that must be paid by the policyholder before any co-insurance cost sharing and/or copayments can be applied to the policy 's coverage . The IRS determines the minimum deductible and out-of-pocket maximums for H.S.A eligible high deductible health plans each year . For this reason the deductible associated with HDHPs changes over time . In 2014 the minimum individual deductible for a HDHP is $ 1250 , in 2015 it will increase to $ 1300 . Re-designs of health insurance plan benefits prompted by the Affordable Care Act have introduced new health insurance plans that have substantially higher deductibles that previously were most often associated with an H.S.A based plans . As such , the consumer must closely examine the detailed benefits summary of the health insurance plans they are considering . This is because there are plan designs now that certainly have a high deductible but they also have other benefit features like office visit or prescription copayments that disqualify them from being used with an H.S.A. . In short , you will be best served to seek out the services of a health insurance broker who is knowledgeable in these matters .
HDHP stands for High Deductible Health Plan . Many companies and individuals have selected these types of plans to help reduce the cost of insurance . The deductible for these types of plans range from $ 2500 up to $ 15,000 . Typically once you reach the set deductible the insurance company picks up the rest of the medical bill . HDHP 's are also qualified plans , which means you could open a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- to help pay for doctors visits and prescription drugs . The savings account grows much like your own personal 401k and has similar tax treatment . These plans are ideal for people who never go to the doctor or who go regularly . Remember , that you will pay everything out of pocket before you reach the deductible . Contact an agent in your state that only handle 's Health Insurance or Employee Benefits for a plan design that works for you .
Medicare Advantage MSA is a rare duck . Essentially a high deductible Medicare plan coupled with a savings account ... much like the HDHP + HSA for the under age 65 crowd . With the Medicare MSA you enroll in a high deductible Part C plan that does not pay until you have satisfied your deductible . You have the option of funding a tax favored savings account to cover some of your out of pocket expense .
Being a health insurance broker is a extreamly difficult undertaking . The two markets that you will want to consider are the individual and the group markets . It is far more difficult to learn the group market because of the many IRC and federal regulations that come into play . There is no one path to becoming a knowledgable and trusted broker although I do recomend that anyone atempting to undertake such a career put in many months of intense study . Continuing education courses are great sources for indepth information about different aspects of the health insurance world such as HSA 's , FSA 's , systems of managed care , HDHP 's , self-funding , regulatory considerations , etc. . . Another wonderful resource that I view as manditory reading for anyone interested in brokering any employee benefts would be `` The Handbook of Employee Benefits '' by Jerry S. Rosenbloom , it is as close to a brokers bible as I have found . I would be happy to discuss this in more detail if you like ... Feel free to email me or give me a call sometime , - Christopher Lawrence 609-453-4359 Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
You can use your HSA -LRB- Health Savings Account -RRB- to purchase long term care insurance . It is a very popular method to purchase this type of policy with tax-favored dollars . An HSA is a very attractive option for reducing your medical insurance costs by utilizing a high-deductible health plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- along with a `` side account '' that you can deposit funds to pay for qualified expenses .
As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years of experience -RRB- , I 'll answer your question quickly and accurately . In 2015 , the maximum deductible is $ 6,450 , which is increasing from 2014 . Of course , there are lower deductibles available and various coinsurance options . An HDHP -LRB- High Deductible Health Plan -RRB- works with an HSA so that you can maximize tax deductions , lower premiums and take control of your healthcare . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier health insurance broker and owner of several national top-rated websites .
Stop loss is normally a term used in self funded employer group health plans but I have heard the phrase used to describe traditional major medical plans as well . Your stop loss is the point where -LRB- at least in theory -RRB- your liability for paying out of pocket ceases and the carrier pays 100 % of future covered claims . This only works in a practical matter in the case of a high deductible health plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- where eligible claims are covered at 100 % once the deductible is satisfied . If you have a copay plan you can satisfy your major medical deductible and then hit your out of pocket coinsurance limit -LRB- stop loss -RRB- but still be responsible for paying claims for doctor visits , Rx and other items .
The best way to get deductions on your taxes using health insurance is to purchase a HIGH Deductible Health Plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- and open a health savings account -LRB- HSA -RRB- with it . The money you put in the HSA over the coarse of the year is tax deductible with the following limits : $ 3300 - Individual 2014 $ 3300 + $ 1000 - Individual 2014 -LRB- 55 + Contribution -RRB- $ 6550 - Family 2014 $ 6550 + $ 1000 - Family 2014 -LRB- 55 + Contribution -RRB- To learn more about HSA coverage visit CLM Insurance Group
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Not Buy Whole Life Insurance ?
You should buy whole life to cover those expenses which you anticipate you will owe or want to disburse regardless of when you die . The whole life policy lets you budget a premium that will not increase until the day of death . Nothing is left to chance as the company guarantees the adequacy of the premium , the amount of the death claim , and the length of time that the coverage will last .
Participating whole life insurance is suitable for conservative minded people who like contractual guarantees throughout their lifetime . But guaranteed universal life can generally cover you for less money with premium guarantees , even less expensive if you only need term life insurance . Indemnification products are priced for coverage more than they are for rates of return .
Why not buy whole life insurance ? Well , you know you 're right , why not ? It is the only policy you actually control , they ca n't take it away or price you out of it . They ca n't make changes without your permission , they ca n't really do anything because you control the policy . That is why whole life is more expensive than other types of coverage . The insurance company is giving up control to the insured , so would they price that low or high ? There are a ton of other reasons as well , but I want to keep this brief .
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why buy whole life for a child ? Well I guess I can tell you why I bought whole life for my kids . In no particular order or rank , I bought whole life because that is the cheapest if will ever be , those policies will become cornerstones of their financial lives . Much like buying a piece of property they now have something to build on . They have future guaranteed insurability with these policies as well What that means is they ca n't be told `` no '' by the insurance company , even if they are no longer insurable . Sort of like a stock option . And finally for this post if either of my kids were to die before me I would be devastated . I would be crushed as I have great kids . So insurance on them would help me get through their passing by paying bills that still need to be paid . I am planning for their future living with these policies and accepting the aspect of the possibility of their early passing and the help they would provide . I could never imagine having an argument with a spouse over what headstone to buy . Whole life on a child is an investment in their future , not just their death .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
Good question ! And there are lots of god reasons why wealthy people buy life insurance . And not just any life insurance , but typically WHole Life insurance . As mentioned above here wealthy people are usually concerned with estate preservation and estates worth over $ 5.6 million incur huge taxation at the death of the owner of the estate . So one reason is to pay the death tax on the estate . Also as mentioned above whole life insurance grows cash value tax-free or at least tax-deferred . And the growth is guaranteed , and with Mutual insurance companies dividends are also paid . And buying whole life insurance is like buying money at a discount with the possibility of considerable wealth growth . And of course the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary tax-free !
Why not buy whole life insurance ? Well , you know you 're right , why not ? It is the only policy you actually control , they ca n't take it away or price you out of it . They ca n't make changes without your permission , they ca n't really do anything because you control the policy . That is why whole life is more expensive than other types of coverage . The insurance company is giving up control to the insured , so would they price that low or high ? There are a ton of other reasons as well , but I want to keep this brief .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
The easiest way to think of Whole life is it is the most expensive short term policy you can buy , but at the same time it is the cheapest long term policy you can purchase . Whole life will be the most costly initially per face amount than either term or universal life . Over time , whole life becomes the cheapest policy to own and the safest to own over a long period of time . With Whole life costs tend to be set contractually , while term and ul policies tend to have rising costs over time that can make them unmanageable if held for a long period of time . So the way to look at whole life is it starts high in cost but becomes low in cost over time . This is why most advisors suggest term insurance for short term needs -LRB- less than 20-30 years -RRB- and whole life for longer periods -LRB- 20 years to life -RRB- as they are most cost effective used for those needs .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do Medicare Supplements Work ?
Medicare supplement plans are designed to dovetail into your original Medicare coverage . Medicare is primary , your supplement plan is secondary . Any Part A or Part B claim that Medicare approves is automatically covered by your Medigap carrier . Approved does not mean your carrier will pay the claim . Your plan may not pay some deductibles , or excess charges .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Choosing a Medicare Plan can seem confusing when doing it for the first time . You have several things to consider . First , do you want a Medicare Supplement Plan or a Medicare Advantage plan ? Sometimes , people like to compare plans online first just to get an idea and they can do that on our website . However , it is important to also to speak with an independent agent that can explain the pros and cons of each plan and how that plan may fit your needs the best . You will always be able to tell a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- or a Medigap Plan -RRB- because they have a letter like Plan F or Plan G , etc. . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is actually great health insurance . Some of the great things about a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is : 1 . No Network - you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . If they take Medicare , they take the supplement . 2 . No referral needed to go to a specialist . 3 . Once you have a plan , the benefits on that plan can not change from year to year . 4 . No large out of pocket surprises when you go to the doctor or hospital
There are several factors to consider before making a decision for your senior Medicare needs : Foremost , will you be better off purchasing an insurance supplement , or is a Medicare Advantage plan better for you ? Those two solutions to solving your needs are different animals entirely , so make sure you educate yourself on the different advantages of each and look for only plans in your area . Some plans are county specific . Some supplements are area specific . This is one journey you do not want to take alone . So to help you make an informed decision with your agent , you of your power or attorney need to keep in mind the following items 1 . Are you eligible to change what you have ? 2 . What medications you take . 3 . How often do you go to the doctor ? 4 . How much risk are you willing to accept in return for lower premiums ? All insurance plans transfer some risk from the client to the insurance company . The less risk -LRB- deductibles and copay -RRB- on the client , the more premiums will be . Supplements that have the same letter name -LRB- PLan N , for example -RRB- theoretically cover the same items , so you should be shown what they do and do not cover , and be able to compare costs with other companies . 5 . Are you on assistance ? 6 . Are you under or over 65 ? When did you get part B ? 7 . What state and county do you live in ? 8 . Do you have extensive chronic illnesses ? 9 . Did you recently move , get married , get divorced , move in with family members ? 10 . What is the carriers financial rating and how long have they been in the Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage business ? These and other questions are ones I ask before making any recommendations to my clients . If you go to an independent broker who has many Medicare clients , he should have several choices to offer , as there are many companies that compete in this arena . It is n't an easy answer , hopefully the above questions will help you gather a checklist for your agent . If he or she does not ask many of these questions , or only has one solution , you might be better off to move on to a different agent
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Medicare Supplement in Florida is affordable , but the specific rates depend on four factors : Where you live , your current age , male or female , and smoker or non-smoker . The rates are standardized , and the ability to change from one Medicare Supplement to another requires that you are approved through health underwriting . When you are turning 65 and looking for a Medicare Supplement , you have an open enrollment opportunity , with no health underwriting considerations at all . The most important thing to remember is that the plan that you picked when you turned 65 is not , necessarily , the plan you should stick with for the rest of your life . The rates go up with all companies and at different speeds . Your agent should be shopping the market for you at each and every anniversary of your policy . You should also pick an independent agent , as opposed to an agent that works for only one company . The difference in the premium offered by an agent that only works for AARP or Mutual of Omaha , vs. a broker that can bring any and all carriers , can be a difference of $ 100 per month or more . This is for the same , exact , standardized Medicare Supplement plan . All of the plans are the same - a Plan F with one carrier has the same benefits and providers that accept it , as the Plan F with the other companies . The only difference is the price . See your `` Medicare & You '' guidebook where it says this exact same thing . My agency has saved seniors over $ 1 million in premium since we 've been in business . Typically , the savings are $ 600 per year when we are shopping a plan from where they were with their old carrier . Again , demand that your agent shop these plans for you every year . Your doctor does not care what name is on the insurance card , or how much you paid in premiums . He or she is still going to give you great care . You should get the most insurance for the money , and with Medicare Supplement insurance in Florida , there is a great difference in the premiums for Medicare Supplement insurance .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Can supplemental insurance be used along with medicare ? That 's what supplemental insurance was made for . Medicare covers many things , but not everything and not every cost a person may face . A medicare supplement steps in and fills the gaps to make Medicare a more complete policy . How complete depends on which plan you choose from the Medicare supplements authorized by your state . One thing to keep in mind as things change in our healthcare world is that many practices are n't accepting new patients with just Medicare , so a supplement is something to consider if you decide to go that route .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Claim Life Insurance As A Tax Deduction ?
Individuals can not claim life insurance premiums on their tax returns , as they are not classified as a medical expense . Businesses that purchase group life insurance for their employees are usually able to deduct the premiums they paid for the plan as a business related expense , at least up to the first $ 50,000 their employees receive .
You can not claim life insurance as a deduction nor can you contribute to life insurance with pretax contributions . There are a few qualified defined benefit contribution plans that permit a portion of your annual contribution to fund life insurance , i.e. whole life 49.5 % and universal life 25 % .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
Life insurance in general is not tax deductible . However , in several instances it can be . The two most important taxes to considering a deduction is income tax & estate tax . Under income tax , life insurance is deductible inside a qualified retirement plan , like a pension or profit sharing . There are some other instances that it may be deductible for a company . In regards , to the estate tax , life insurance is not really deductible , but it can be taxed heavily if not set up correctly . The ownership of the life insurance policy determines if it is included in the estate & taxed or excluded from the estate and not taxed ! In all cases , base to seek competent advisors .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Homeowners insurance typically does cover your roof , whether comprised of common asphalt shingles or another material . However , policies may differ in HOW your roof is covered . Some policies cover the roof for actual cash value -LRB- market value - depreciation = actual cash value -RRB- . While others have a guaranteed amount of coverage . Most people do not know that their deductible may be higher for wind orhail damage claims -LRB- the most common perilswhich lead to an insurance claim on a roof -RRB- . Policies typically have an option of a flat deductible , meaningthe same deductible is paid regardless of the type of claim . As an example let 's say you have a flat $ 500 deductible . Whether there is afire claim or wind damage claim , you pay $ 500 for your deductible . Many policies have the option , and some even require , a higher deductible for wind/hail claims.For example , you may have a $ 1,000 deductible for wind/hail and $ 500 deductible AOP -LRB- all other perils -RRB- . Want to know what coverage you have ? Check out your policy or ask your agent today !
Typically , you can not claim your home owner 's insurance on your primary residence as a deduction on your taxes . If you own , rental homes , then you could deduct the premiums as a tax deduction . A good rule of thumb for insurance used for personal benefit -LRB- not a business use -RRB- ... if you can deduct the premiums on your taxes , the benefits are likely to be taxed . Disability is probably the best illustration ... if the premiums are taken out pre-tax , then the benefit is taxed . Life insurance inside a pension plan is another example ... the death benefit is taxed as income !
Let me differentiate between a liability claim and a property claim . If you are sued , notify the claims office of the insurance company immediately . Do not sign any papers and do not make any statements to agents of the individual or company suing you . Never hesitate to submit a liability claim . If your home is uninhabitable because of a covered loss such as fire or lightning call the insurance company claims office immediately . If you are the victim of a disaster , call the claims office immediately . Many insurance companies have mobile claims operations that are dispatched to help victims of disasters . Any damage to your home is a big deal . However , if the damage is not more than two times your deductible , and it pays to know your deductible , call your agent first . Property insurance policies have varying features that can either reduce the deductible or reduce the premium if your policy is claims free . Sometimes a little pencil work will show that it is better to forgo the claim as the reductions you receive for being claims free could be greater than the amount you would recover . If there is water damage and you can not reach your agent quickly enough contact the claims office because water damage only gets worse ! Often a quick responding water mitigation team can reduce and almost eliminate the loss .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
There isnt a deductible if you are sued . When property is damaged as a result of a covered peril -LRB- fire , windstorm , etc. -RRB- the company will apply the stated deductible to the settlement of a claim . The purpose of the deductible is to reduce the number of claims by eliminating the small , inconsequential losses . In reducing the number of claims the cost of the insurance is reduced . The company usually will offer several deductibles to choose . You can tell by the premium change the effect that these smaller claims have on the cost of insurance . A deductible is much like self-insuring . It allows you , the policyholder to assume a portion of every loss in order to reduce the cost . The higher the deductible the closer you become to catastrophic insurance . As a principle , it is wise to assume as much of the risk yourself as you can reasonably afford to reap the benefit of a lower premium .
A deductible is the amount of dollars that you are responsible for in the event of a claim . Of course , if there is another driver involved who is at fault and is insured , you will most likely pay nothing at all , depending on where you live . You can select the deductible on your vehicles , with lower deductibles costing more than higher deductibles . For example , if you have a $ 500 deductible on your car insurance collision benefit , and the damages are $ 4500 , you will have to pay $ 500 of that amount . In some scenarios , $ 500 is deducted from the check that is given to you from the insurer . The same concept applies to a comprehensive claim such as fire , vandalismor theft . When there is glass breakage , you may have no deductible . Also , generally , comprehensive deductibles are less than collision deductibles on most policies . A reputable national website or experienced broker can easily review your deductible options and quickly determine which amount is the most cost-effective .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
A deductible for auto insurance typically only for collision and other than collision -LRB- comprehensive -RRB- coverages . When you have a claim on your collision or other than collision coverage your deductible is your portion of the claim amount . In other words your deductible is the amount of money that you will pay out of your pocket toward the total claim amount . If you have a five hundred dollar deductible and the claim is for one thousand dollars then the carrier will only pay five dollars of the claim amount .
Think of the deductible as a form of self insurance . In other words , the portion you 'll pay before insurance begins to pay on claims . Health plans usually offer a choice of deductibles have a lower premium cost if you choose a higher deductible . A higher deductilbe means you accept more cost upfront for the use of a health plan in order to receive a lower premium cost . After the deductible has been met , usually you go into a phase called `` co-insurance '' . Co-insurance is the phase where you and the insurance company split the bill for care . A co-insurance level may be 50-50 , 60-40 , 70-30 or other combinations depending on your plan . For example if you had a plan with a 80/20 coinsurance provison and a $ 500 deductible and a bill for $ 2500 for a service . How it would be split up is as follows . The first $ 500 of the bill is yours . Of the remaining $ 2000 , the insurance company pays $ 1600 towards the bill and you have an additional $ 400 . Please note : once you 've met your deductible for the year , you will no longer be charged it for claims , Co-insurance would be next . Then once you 've met your co-insurance limits , your claims for the balance of the year -LRB- not counting copays -RRB- are covered at 100 % .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Transfer My Car Insurance To A Rental Car ?
Most automobile policies extend coverage from a covered automobile to a rental . The terms and limits of your policy apply . In some cases state rules might mandate slightly different coverage in which case your policy will adjust . Rental companies offer coverage that allows you to report the damage and walk away . That could be an advantage .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
The insurance company you currently have your auto insurance with may extend coverage to a rental car . If so you do have the option of waiving the coverage offered by the rental car agency . I recommend you contact your agent to verify if your coverage applies to a rental car since not all polices will extend to rental cars . Also depending on the state you are in there are advantages of purchasing the rental cars insurance . For example if you have a solo car accident the damage will be picked up by the rental car agency and not your own insurance carrier thereby avoiding any potential points that may apply . But again , I strongly suggest you contact your agent if you are not sure that your current insurance carrier will extend coverage to a rental car .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
That is a great question ! The answer will depend upon your company , and the policy restrictions . It may cover for a specified number of days , it may cover until the repairs to your vehicle are completed . A couple of years ago my car was hit , and the driver at faults insurance covered my rental car . After a week , they notified me that they were no longer going to cover the rental car , and it would be my expense . My car was n't finished , and the insurance company had not been in a hurry to see it get finished . After discussing the situation with them , they agreed to pay until my car was completed . They were n't happy , but were liable . If you would like some details on that discussion , contact me , and I 'll share them with you . Thanks for asking !
Rental car insurance is available from rental car agencies . If you own an insured car the insurance from that car extends to a rental car which means that purchasing the coverage from the rental agency is not necessary . If you do not own a car , it is possible to purchase non-owned auto insurance which would eliminate the requirement for buying liability insurance from the rental agency . You would still need physical damage coverage .
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
No rental car agency is going to rent you a car without some type of insurance . If you do not have your own insurance or do not wish to use your own insurance you may purchase the insurance offered by the rental car carrier . Keep in mind , liability limits offered by the rental car agencies are state minimum . All rental car agencies are actually concerned about is that their car is going to be repaired in the event of a loss .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
That is going to depend on the rental car company . Many rental car companies have third party insurance providers that they work with to provide clients with temporary insurance coverage during the period that they are renting a car from the rental car company . I would suggest that you call some of the local rental car companies that are in your area to find out if they offer this service .
As a rule of thumb I always recommend you have as much coverage on a rental car as you would the cars you own . Typically , this is not an issue because most agents will automatically put you down for `` non-owned/hired '' autos on your personal policy . This is just an endorsement to your policy that will extend your liability and collision coverage to cars you are legally borrowing or renting . Make sure you check your policy for an endorsement like this . Other options : you can get rental insurance through the car rental agency or your credit card sometimes offers coverage for rental cars , just call the company and ask .
When you rent a car you are responsible for any accident you might have with the car and are also responsible to return the car to the agency in the same condition as when you rented it . While the insurance offered by the rental company may be overpriced they do not do any of the underwriting and investigation of the driver that a normal insurance company will do . That makes their selection process less critical and their prices higher . The advantage of the insurance that they offer is that you can return the automobile or tell the company where the automobile is located and the insurance that you purchased from them will complete your contract with the rental company -LRB- that is not a legal opinion , just an observation . -RRB- The coverage on your current automobile extends to a car that you have rented . If you have inadequate coverage on your private automobile you will have inadequate coverage on the rental car . If you are involved in an accident the rental company will try to keep the meter running on the rental agreement if you dont have their insurance .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
That is a great question ! By law , you have to be insured to drive a car . Now when it comes to rental cars , do you have to already have a policy ? Not necessarily - you may purchase a temporary policy from the rental agency ; check with your credit card company , many offer rental cars and insurance to drive them at a discount ; and sometimes your frequent flier cards are tied to rental car companies and deals also . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
It is possible that your auto policy will extend coverage onto a rental car while it temporarily replaces yours . Remember though that if you have an older car and are just carying liability , that will be the only coverage that transfers . You could therefore be financially exposed without also having Comprehensive and Collision -LRB- Physical Damage -RRB- coverage . Check with your insurance professional . Also , check the terms and conditions of your credit card . Many cards provide some limited coverage for a rental , usually up to $ 500.00 , which in many cases is enough to cover your own auto policy deductible .
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get A Life Insurance Policy If I Am Pregnant ?
My experience has been that it is possible to get life insurance during the first trimester , but that insurance agencies are reluctant to take an application for a woman in her second and third trimesters of pregnancy , in case of complications . But I am sure there are some companies that will cover women who are up to 6 months pregnant with a medically underwritten policy , especially if they have had previous event free pregnancies and have no pre-existing conditions . For those who are in the third trimester of pregnancy , there are No Exam policies you can get .
I am not aware of any carrier that will issue a life insurance policy to a pregnant female . There are many risk factors to consider which make it impossible to properly price the risk of a life insurance policy on a woman that is pregnant . Every carrier I am aware of will not consider an application until the pregnancy has ended and the woman has been released from her doctor 's care .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
My experience has been that it is possible to get life insurance during the first trimester , but that insurance agencies are reluctant to take an application for a woman in her second and third trimesters of pregnancy , in case of complications . But I am sure there are some companies that will cover women who are up to 6 months pregnant with a medically underwritten policy , especially if they have had previous event free pregnancies and have no pre-existing conditions . For those who are in the third trimester of pregnancy , there are No Exam policies you can get .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Yes , there are some companies that require medical underwriting that will allow a pregnant woman to apply in her first two trimesters . There are some No Exam companies that will allow a woman to apply while pregnant in any trimester . You must be within the policy 's weight guidelines and not be experiencing complications due to pregnancy in order to obtain a policy while pregnant , unless the policy has very few health questions -LRB- simplified or guaranteed issue -RRB- , in which case those things might not matter .
I am glad that this question was asked . Now that the Affordable Care Act is in force you will be able to buy individual insurance that will cover maternity even if you are already pregnant . Prior to Jan. 1 , 2014 it was virtually impossible to find an individual policy to cover that . It was mostly found in a Group Health Insurance Plan from your employer . As long as you stick with one of the major insurance companies you will be fine . I would shop around and find the plan that makes sense to you but no matter who you but it from as long as it is a qualified health plan then the policy has to cover the 10 essential health care requirements . All you must figure out is deductible and coinsurance . If you pay a higher premium per month then you will have low or no deductibles , If you want a lower monthly payment then you may have higher copay 's and deductibles at the time of service .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
Can you get disability insurance if you are already pregnant ? Yes , but not for the pregnancy . It is possible to get disability insurance while pregnant , but disability insurance plans use a pre-existing condition clause in the policy to prevent a person from going on immediate claim when they purchase the policy .
Yes , unfortunately , pregnancy is a pre-existing condition for disability insurance if you apply while pregnant . If you applied before becoming pregnant , obviously , then the pregnancy would not be a pre-existing condition . However , some polices may require that you apply several months before you become pregnant in order to qualify .
You can not get a short term disability policy that will pay for time off for a normal pregnancy and delivery , once you are already pregnant . If you got the short term disability insurance policy before becoming pregnant , they can receive benefits from that policy when you delivery your baby .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Yes you can get health insurance when pregnant , but there are limitations . There are three places to turn . You can enroll in a group health plan through your employer . HIPPA prevents group plans from excluding pregnancy as a pre-existing condition even if you had no prior coverage . You would enroll during your open enrollment . You can opt into an Affordable Care Act plan in your state marketplace during open enrollment . The policy would take effect on January 1 . Any pregnancy related medical expenses would be immediately covered . Medicaid provides immediate coverage for pregnant women who meet income guidelines . There are no open enrollment limitations for Medicaid .
Every insurance carrier will ask medical questions when completing an application.Some carriers will decline applications for pregnant women.Many willnot ask any pregnancy related questions , so you may be able to purchase a policy while pregnant in many cases . Every policy will exclude coverage for any preexisting medical condition . That exclusion may last 6 to 12 months . That means your existing pregnancy will not be covered , but accidents and illnesses unrelated to your pregnancy may be covered . Policies covering normal childbirth are difficult to find . They are only offered through employers . If you have the opportunity to buy a policy it may be your only chance to get covered for future pregnancies .
You can purchase individual life insurance while pregnant . Most companies will not have a problem with the first two trimesters underwriting an individual who is pregnant and at that point experiencing a normal pregnancy without complications . The third trimester is a bit more dicey as most carriers at that point may wish to wait until after childbirth to underwrite . I have written and had issued life insurance for people up to the 7th month without any extra premium or restrictions by the insurance company . It is going to depend on the health of the person and how the pregnancy is going .
All health insurance plans now cover maternity . They handle maternity just like any other claim . So how much it would cost you depends on the plan you get ... . What is the deductible ? What is the out-of-pocket maximum ? If you 're buying a plan specifically because you see childbirth down the road , consider 2 things : If you 're pregnant now , you ca n't get insurance because you 've obviously got a pre-existing condition . If you 're not pregnant now , and you 're buying a new plan , then you 'll have to replacethe planby January anywaydue tohealthcare reform . So if you want health insurance now , there 's really no reason to factor childbirth into the equasion because you 'll be changing plans -LRB- due to healthcare reform -RRB- before you deliver .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
No , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition , and you can not get maternity disability insurance while pregnant . There may be an exception somewhere , but it is highly doubtful . Even most group plans require that you have worked at the business before becoming pregnant in order to use disability benefits for normal pregnancy .
If your daughter had health insurance at least a year before she got pregnant them yes , it will be covered . Read the fine print on the policy.If she tries to get insurance after discovering she was pregnant , then it is considered a pre-existing condition and she wo n't be covered unless there is a complication during labor .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Home Insurance Required In Vermont ?
Home Insurance is not required in any State , a homeowner is free to self insure the risk thereby not paying premium for an insurance contract . If a homeowner decides to borrow money from a bank or other lending institution and offer the home as collateral for the loan , there most probably would be a contractual obligation to provide insurance naming the mortgagee on the insurance policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Life insurance agents in Vermont make a wide range of salaries . As with any other business that pays commission -LRB- and usually , commission only -RRB- , the amount of work put into the career makes a big difference . But it also depends on the economy , how many people you know , whether you have the money to stick with it for a while , etc. . If there is an average , most agents in Vermont probably do not make it , but earn far less or far more than that .
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics , the national average annual income of an insurance agent is around $ 44,500 . There is no specific information for Vermont life insurance agents . There is a lot of variance in income earnings since the jobs is generally 100 % commission . Some agents will earn less than $ 20,000 per year and other will earn over $ 100,000 per year .
Vermont BlueCross BlueShield has a health insurance product call Medigap Blue . It provides Medicare Supplement coverage to Original Medicare Part A and Part B . They offer Medigap Plans A , C , D , F and N with all the standardized benefits as with other insurance companies . Their premium rates are grouped into under 65 disabled and over 65 . Please let me know if I can offer further assistance .
Such an excellent question ! Yes , but do it in a very new and special way . There is now a Life Insurance you can buy which comes with living benefits , but not just the ability to get some money from it , but true living benefits to cover your needs in life . The benefits include chronic care , chronic illness , terminal illness , retirement , and other major needs . This type of policy is only available through a limited agent pool , those working with Premier Financial Alliance . They provide a product through National Life Group , 167 years in Vermont . The company limits its sales of this full product exclusively through Premier Financial . I urge you to call your PFA agent for find out the details . You can save a great deal of money by combining your policies and coverage , while get the coverage you really need . Thank you . GARY LANE . PFA agent , 7144229616 .
Yes , there are many great companies , but the choice should be made with some key factors in mind . My personal favorite has been around for 167 years , based in Vermont . It is a mutual company , meaning all profits are returned to the policy holders , lowering the rates . It is National Life Group . Why do I prefer it ? Because they offer , at absolutely no extra charge , and have been doing so for many years , LIVING BENEFITS . Their policies will cover you while your are living , not just when you die . They cover such things as chronic care , catastrophic care , terminal care . You can even go overseas to get experimental treatments to save your life . If you can not work , due to disability , they will also help . You save money by having only one policy and you are reliable coverage from a great company , at a low price . Its best policies are available through their largest brokers , Premier Financial Alliance , PFA . Talk with your local PFA agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To my knowledge , no other company has purchased National Life Insurance Company . National Life was established in Vermont in 1848 . Life of the Southwest was purchased by National Life in , and they also own Equity and Sentinel . However , National Life is the flagship enterprise of all those companies , and is not owned by another company .
Yes , most disability insurance policies pay claims for mental disorders . However , often times the benefit period for mental disorders is capped at 24 months except in the state of Vermont where limitations are not allowed . If the benefit is capped , then the benefits will cease once the insured has been paid benefits for the specified period of time -LRB- again usually 24 months -RRB- . There are some carriers that do not cap -LRB- restrict -RRB- this benefit .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
Unlike auto insurance Homeowners insurance is not required by any law . However , that does n't mean that you 're not required to carry it . I know that sounds contradictory , but there 's a significant distinction . Even though you 're not required by law to carry it , you may be required by contract , namely a mortgage , to carry at least a minimum of coverage . When you purchase a home with a mortgage , the mortgage company will require you to carry coverage that will repair or rebuild your home to certain standards . The mortgage company is simply protecting the asset you 're using as collateral for the loan . If you own your home outright , you not required to insure it at all . Why someone would n't protect their biggest asset is a mystery to me , but it could happen . Be smart . find an agent you can trust . He/she will be able to help you get the coverage you need at a price you can afford .
You can , and it 's not uncommon at all . However , there are guidelines the insurance company will want you to follow . Many people have a primary home and a vacation or summer home . These can both be insured with homeowners policies , with one being designated as a seasonal home . The only real requirement is that the owner is the one occupying both homes , even if one is seasonal . Some people will try to do this for a home they rent out because it 's less expensive and the coverage is more broad . This is a big no-no . If there 's a claim and the insurance company realizes that the owner is not the one occupying the home , they will void the coverage and deny the claim . Rental homes require a different policy that takes into account the rental exposure . As long as you 're following the rules , you 'll be fine insuring two homes . Just be smart and do it the right way .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Do I Need Medigap If I Have Medicare Advantage ?
You are not allowed to have both a Medigap and Medicare Advantage plan . Even if you were , you do n't need both . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are essentially in a privatized Medicare plan . Your claims are handled by the insurance carrier . Claims are filed with the carrier , not Medicare . Any issues you have are handled by your carrier . If you have original Medicare , you should consider a Medigap plan to limit your out of pocket exposure . In this arrangement your provider files the claim for you with Medicare who adjudicates the claim then sends it on to your Medigap carrier .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
Medigap works along side your original Medicare helping to pay Medicare covered expenses that are not paid for by Medicare due to deductibles and coinsurance . You will pay a premium for a Medigap plan but your out of pocket exposure in the event of a large claim will be less than with a Medicare Advantage plan Medicare Advantage takes the place of Medicare . While you are still in the Medicare system and protections , responsibility for benefits and claim management are provided by the insurance company , not Medicare . You can not have both a Medigap and a Medicare Advantage Plan since Medicare Advantage has different deductibles and copay 's than Medicare . Premiums are much less than Medigap plans but you will have more out of pocket exposure in most cases .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
Medigap Insurance , also called `` Medicare Supplement '' Insurance works with original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- to provide coverage for the `` gaps '' - the coinsurance and deductibles required to be paid by the Medicare beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- under original Medicare . Although Medicare represents excellent insurance coverage , these `` gaps '' can be expensive for the consumer . For example , the Part A -LRB- hospitalization -RRB- deductible for 2015 is $ 1,260 , and the Part B -LRB- doctors costs , etc. -RRB- is $ 147 plus 20 % coinsurance . A Medigap policy insures these potentially large `` gaps '' with the payment of a known monthly premium . Medigap Insurance is optional for the consumer - there is no `` requirement '' to purchase it , although it is a good idea to get some Medigap coverage if staying with original Medicare . Alternatively , Medicare beneficiaries may select a Medicare Advantage Plan . Although there are costs and limitations in Medicare Advantage Plans , a beneficiary does not need , nor can they purchase Medigap Insurance under a Medicare Advantage Plan .
Medigap and Part C are not the same . Medigap is supplemental coverage to your Original Medicare Part A and B . You do n't have to buy a Medigap Plan , it is optional . Many people , however , use the Medigap Policy to help cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs not covered by Part A and B. Medicare Supplement insurance is private insurance in which you pay a premium every month . You are allowed to visit any provider who accepts Medicare . Part C is called a Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO , so you are restricted to using network doctors . This type of Plan combines Part A , Part B , and usually Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- . It 's important to note , if you join a Medicare Advantage Plan , you do n't need and ca n't be sold a Medigap Policy . In other words , you ca n't buy a Medigap Policy to supplement your Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
No , technically it 's not . Part C is also referred to as Medicare Advantage . So , when people are deciding on coverage they will either go the Medigap Plan route or the Medicare Advantage route . Medigap Plans cover what Medicare Part A & B do not and there are a lot of plans to pick from . For example , with Medigap Plan F , you would have no coinsurance , no deductibles and no copays . So , you budget the monthly premium that works for you and then you do n't have to worry about large out of pocket medical bills that come when you do n't expect it . Medigap Plans also do n't have a network so you can see any doctor or hospital you want . If they take Medicare , they will take the Medigap Plan regardless of who the carrier is . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
There are different kinds of supplemental plans that are sometimes coupled with a Medicare Advantage plan . As others have pointed out , you do not need a traditional Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan in addition to your Advantage plan . Some carriers offer cancer plans , hospital indemnity plans and other single purpose plans . You will be told you need these plans to fill the gaps in Medicare Advantage plans and cover your out of pocket expenses in the event of a hospitalization or severe illness . Truth is , you do n't need these add on plans . Just a waste of your money and a way for the agent pushing them to pad his or her wallet at your expense . If you feel you will have difficulty paying your out of pocket expenses which can be several thousand dollars under a Medicare Advantage plan , you should consider switching to traditional Medicare and buying a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan . Medigap plan N is a good transition product or for those on a tight budget , Medicare supplement plan Hi F. #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Advantage plans are quite different from a Medicare supplement plan , also known as Medigap . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in original Medicare . Your health insurance is covered by a private insurance carrier . Medical providers file your claims with your Advantage carrier , not Medicare . Most Advantage plans have networks you are required to use if you want full coverage . Some Advantage plans provide OON -LRB- out of network -RRB- coverage but with higher deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance . HMO Advantage plans typically have no benefits when you use a non-par provider . With original Medicare you have the freedom to use any doctor , hospital or other medical provider anywhere in the country . There are no networks . Medical providers file claims with Medicare . Once Medicare adjudicates and approves the claim it is forwarded on to your Medigap carrier so they can pay their portion .
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a very well-controlled , predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Since working in this field I firmly believe that Medigap or Medicare Supplements are much better that Medicare Advantage Plans . First of all there are no network restrictions with a Medigap plan , you can see any doctor or hospital of your choice in the United States that accept Medicare . If you like to travel you are out of network with a Medicare Advantage Plan which means when you see doctors or hospitals that are outside of the network your Medicare Advantage Plan may not pay any of the cost . The right Medicare Supplement Plan to go along with your Original Medicare will keep your out of pocket cost very low for doctor and hospital services . Medicare Advantage Plans have high out of pocket cost when you are faced with serious or chronic health conditions . Depending on the plan your maximum out of pocket in a calendar year could be as much as $ 6,700 . The freedom to see any doctor or hospital of your choice combined with low out of pocket cost make Medigap much better than Advantage Plans .
Yes , you can switch from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . To do so , you must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage plan . Then you must enroll in original Medicare . If anyone asks you to buy a Medigap policy without being enrolled in original Medicare , you should report them . If you have never used Medigap before and you had Medicare Advantage for under a year , you can have your choice of Medigap policies .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Can You Borrow From Whole Life Insurance ?
In Canada , you can borrow from your whole life policy as soon as there is a cash value in the policy . If you pay the annual premium that could be day 2 of the policy . Important to remember that if the amount borrowed exceed the adjusted cost base of the policy it with trigger a taxable policy gain . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
As you build up equity , you can borrow against it in your permanent life insurance policy . This is one of the great benefits of permanent life insurance ! Generally , it takes about two years to reach this point , as the initial year 's premiums help defray the cost of setting up the policy . You can decide never to pay back the loan , and it is yours tax free to keep , but it will lower the death benefit , so do so only if necessary or pay it back if you can . Thank you . GARY LANE .
You can borrow against a whole life policy when the cash value is in the positive range . You should look at your illustration pages to see the year the excess cash begins to show value . Most whole life insurance policies reach this threshold between years 5 and 7 depending on how the agent set up at or near target price . I would consult with your agent or customer service on not borrowing too much cash value and lapse your policy .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
Whole Life is designed to last your whole life . Your premiums will cover the the cost of insurance protection until the day you die , or else pay you the money in a lump sum if you do not die by a certain age . Whole Life also has a savings component that allows you to borrow from the cash value , if you desire . Universal Life also has the components of insurance protection -LRB- death benefit -RRB- plus savings -LRB- cash value -RRB- . But UL can be designed in a multitude of ways , and it can be further adjusted while the policy is in existence . E.g. . You might want your Universal Life policy to have a large face amount when your children are in the home , but then reduce the face amount to simply pay for final expenses when you are older . You have the flexibility to do that with Universal Life . Not only that , but when you reduce the face amount , you might be able to also reduce or quit paying premiums . Or you can keep paying the same premium and cause your policy to build up extra cash value . A word of caution when buying Universal Life . It is called permanent life insurance , but it is not guaranteed to be permanent unless you choose a UL policy that states that guarantee . Thankfully , there are guaranteed no lapse UL policies on the market ; even those where you can `` dial '' the guarantee to make the policy last to whatever age you choose . As with Whole Life , if you borrow from the policy , you must pay the money back with interest to ensure that your death benefit will be paid per the terms of the contract .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
If it 's a permanent life insurance policy that builds cash value , you can borrow from it . The amount that can be borrowed depends on how much cash value has accrued inside the policy . When you borrow money from a life insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the money is expected to be paid back and loan 's require interest to be paid on the loan . If the insured dies and there is an outstanding loan balance on it , the beneficiary would receive the death benefit less the loan amount and any interest due on the loan . It may be helpful to discuss it with your agent before borrowing from the policy to find out more about what will happen -LRB- e.g. what 's the interest rate that will be attached to the loan -RRB- when you borrow from the cash value .
That is a great question ! The only things that you need to have in order to borrow from your Globe Life -LRB- or any company 's life insurance policy -RRB- are these : First , that you are the owner of the policy . If Your parents bought it for you when you were young , and they are still the owners , you will not be able to borrow from it . They can , but you ca n't . You must be the owner of the policy . Second , it must be a whole life policy , as term policies have no cash value ; And third , that there is an adequate cash reserve to borrow from . If the policy is fairly new , there may not be much to borrow from , or if there has already been a loan taken , you may not be able to take more cash out , without tanking the policy . My advice would be to contact your agent , or Globe themselves , -LRB- have your policy number handy -RRB- and ask them if you are good to borrow . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
The type of life insurance you can borrow from is permanent life insurance that has a cash value . This can be Whole Life , Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life . Normally , Term life does not have a cash value , and therefore is not a policy that can be borrowed from . Keep in mind that you may need to wait for a permanent policy to build a cash value before you can borrow from it , and not all cash value accumulation is guaranteed .
When borrowing from a life insurance policy , you 're borrowing monies from its cash value - this is only available on permanent programs -LRB- cash value does n't build inside term insurance policies -RRB- . You can only borrow up to the amount available in the cash value - this figure typically goes up over time . Review your annual statement or call your agent/the carrier to find out the current cash value available inside the policy . Keep in mind , when you borrow from your policy 's cash value , you are in effect creating a loan because you are expected to pay back the borrowed amount - and with any loan , there is an interest rate attached . The longer it 's kept out , the more interest that is charged . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan against the policy , the loan amount plus any interest is subtracted from the death benefit and the difference is given to the beneficiary .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Renters Insurance Should You Buy ?
There are two major divisions of coverage . The attention is normally focused on the personal property coverage , however the liability protection may be much more important . Select a policy that provides $ 300-500 ,000 in liablity coverage . This is where you could experience a major loss . The property portion should reflect the cost of actually replacing the contents of your rented home or apartment , should they be lost through a covered peril .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
All insurance is based upon the concept of shared risk . You should buy a renters policy if you can not afford the cost of replacing everything that you own . You should buy a renters policy if you can not afford the cost of a lawsuit from personal injury or property damage . You should buy a renters policy if it is required by your landlord .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
You may be required to purchase Renters Insurance . It depends if this is a requirement in your rental agreement or lease agreement . Some properties do require renters insurance to cover their interest . Renters Insurance also covers general liability and most leasing agency 's require a minimum of $ 100,000 in liability insurance . They do not care how much personal property you insure as long as the liability insurance is there . These policy 's can be very inexpensive especially for example if you buy the minimum policy $ 5.000 in personal property is usually the lowest you can buy , and $ 100,000 in liability for around $ 10.00 per month
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A Good Rate For Term Life Insurance ?
A good rate for term life insurance depends on length of the term and how the carrier views your personal health . Each carrier has a different appetite for various risks when it comes to issuing life insurance . It 's tough to know exactly who will be best for a given circumstances of medical history , but any good agent should be able to easily match you up with the appropriate company to give you the best rate . There are also online resources that you can use to analyze your health and try to determine which companies are best suited for you , but caution should be used in this approach as there may be certain vernacular that is difficult for a layperson to navigate .
Term life insurance is generally offered in five year increments :5 , 10 , 15 , 20 or 30 years -LRB- based on age . -RRB- So the guaranteed period of coverage has it 's own price tag . Even your behavior has a price tag like motor vehicle violations , dangerous recreational activities and hazardous vocations . But the big premium factor is your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Your rate depends on this laundry list .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
Term life insurance is good to pay large expenses that only last for a set length of time . A mortgage , small business loan , or tuition loan are some large liabilities that most people do not have the money saved up to pay off , if they should die prematurely . But they are expenses that will not last forever . Therefore , Term insurance is a low cost way to cover those large debts for a set period of time , without breaking the bank . Another thing Term insurance is good for is raising a family . I recommend purchasing Term insurance long enough to get the youngest child to at least age 23 . Not in every case , but generally , I feel that Term insurance is not good for small face amounts . Most people who rely on life insurance to cover small debts , will also need life insurance to cover their final expenses . There are so many reasonably priced Whole Life policies that can be purchased in very small face amounts , and for persons of all type of health . And you can really save a lot of money on those policies by buying them at a younger age . Some can be paid up in a set number of years , and some have such good cash value that , if you decided to stop paying on the policy in the future , you would still have a decent sized paid up policy to hold onto . Of course , Term Life is also not good for any need that does not end until death . E.g. Funeral costs , paying estate settlement costs , passing money to grandchildren , etc. . Unless you know that you will have a large stream of money in the future so that you can afford to convert your Term insurance to permanent later on , you are usually better off just buying Whole Life or guaranteed no lapse Universal Life , to start with , for needs that do not end until death . Those are my general opinions on what Term Life Insurance is good for , and what it is not so good for . There are many exceptions as each person 's situation is different and policies can be set up to accomplish different purposes . Please do not hesitate to give me a call if you 'd like to discuss this in person .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
When shopping for Medicare Supplement do not just go by rates . Many agents will tell you that all plans are the same and the only difference is rates , and that is true . However , I have seen many companies go in to an area with rates that are low , only to raise the rates by 30 % or more the following year . Unless you like changing plans every year and you know your health will always be good , this is not necessarily the best way to go . Look for a company that is competitive , but that has a good history of rate increases , generally less than 10 % . Every agent is getting solicited by companies wanting them to sell their now lowest rate plan . Find a good local agent who has been around for a while . I personally like the AARP Med Sup . It is competitive and has an excellent rate history . It also uses community rating versus attained age rating . With attained age , which most companies use , you pay a low rate at first but every year you can count on a rate increase just because you got older , in addition to the rate increase the company has . With community rating , the rates are equaled over the ages so that you pay a little more at 65 for example but when you are 85 your rates will be lower than if you went with an attained age company . Also look for an agent that also does Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug plans . He will be able to help you decide which would be to your best advantage .
There are quite a few good insurance companies out there . What you want to do is look at financial ratings to get an idea of the quality of a carrier . Carriers pay financial ratings companies to review their books and assign a letter grade as a representation of the company 's quality . Different ratings agencies view companies with a different pov , so it is always good when choosing a good company to find one that has been reviewed by several ratings companies . You might want to check with your state insurance commissioner 's office to see what complaints or fines have been applied to companies . The good thing to know , is there are a lot of companies that are good out there . That is where the strength of the insurance industry is . Not just a few companies , but many companies of quality .
What is a good rate for whole life insurance ? What ever you can qualify for is the correct answer . You are the discount . Your good health and good health history reduces the rate for whole life -LRB- actually all types of life insurance basically -RRB- and provides you the discounted cost you seek . So if you have taken good care of yourself , the best rates will be available to you .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
A good life insurance agent has some important characteristics . A good agent is a good listener . A good agent will listen to you and will check with you to make sure that you are fully understood . A good agent communicates clearly to both you and to the insurance company . The agent should explain as completely as possible the details of the policy and patiently answer your questions . The good agent will communicate your information and concerns to the underwriting staff of the insurance company . Underwriters are usually quite conservative . The more that the agent can paint a picture that the underwriter can understand ; it is more likely that you will have a good outcome . Finally a good agent offers sound financial advice . A good agent isnt an order taker . A good agent will show you the advantages of alternate approaches to your problem . A good agent will not leave out anything vital to the case and will carefully counsel you as it regards your unique situation . Are there many good life insurance agents ? I think that there are , however , they are often in demand and do little to solicit business . You probably need to check with your colleagues and friends and locate that good life insurance agent that they trust .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
What do you need to know about term life insurance ? You need to know that : 1 -RRB- Unless you have some type of rider stating otherwise , term life insurance will jump way up in price at the end of the term , and go up in price annually after that . Or it will end at the end of the term . 2 -RRB- Most term life insurance will stay the same premium during the entire term , and the death benefit will stay the same for the entire term . But you need to ask your agent to make sure you are buying a guaranteed level premium , and a guaranteed level death benefit , to be sure . 3 -RRB- There is no cash value in term life insurance . Only ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- term will pay back a substantial cash value if you keep it enough years , and are alive at the end of the term . 4 -RRB- If you miss a payment more than two months , your term policy will end . There is no cash value in it to pay the premium , so it is very important to keep up your payments with term life insurance . 5 -RRB- Many term policies are convertible to permanent insurance for at least part of the term period . If you convert your term policy , you must convert it to the policy or policies stipulated by the life insurance company at that point in time . These policies may or may not have lifetime guarantees , but will be UL or WL . The rate will be based on your age at the time of conversion . There are no health requirements ; your permanent policy will be rated similarly to what your term policy was rated .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
Ten year term life insurance is life insurance that typically has the rate locked in for 10 years . Sometimes term policies are only guaranteed for the rate not to go up for part of the term . So do be sure , when you are comparing rates , to be sure that you are comparing policies that have premiums guaranteed not to increase for the entire term . It is a great temptation to buy ten year term life insurance because the premiums are so low compared to premiums for longer terms . However , if you need coverage longer than 10 years , it is usually a better idea to buy a policy with a longer term . Why ? Because , most likely , you are healthier now than you will be in 10 years . And at this time in history , life insurance rates are very low . So locking in historically low rates based on your current good health is almost certain to be a good deal for you for many years to come .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
There is no way to say what life insurance will cost for any one person . Good life insurance is a policy that has some guarantees , is with a good company , and accomplishes the purposes for which you are purchasing it . To find what the cost of good life insurance for you , you 'd need to contact an agency that will help you discern your purposes for your policy , then find your best rate from a good life insurance company .
Here are some sample rates for you : $ 100/month $ 1000/month $ 10,000 / month Hmmm . Clearly , more information is needed . Face amount ? Guarantee period ? Gender ? State of residence ? Smoker status?Underwriting class ? You want to know something interesting ? You could have two people born on the same day , same gender , same medical history , and same everything else , except one of them had a parent who died of cancer before age 60 - and each could be charged a different rate for the exact same life insurance product ! Life insurance underwriting gets very , very particular . This , of course , means that your broker should prequalify you for coverage so that you know you are being given both a low rate , and a reliable rate , tailor made just for you . Not what is typical , but what is competitive for YOU . Life insurance just can not be treated as any old commodity when you shop for it . You can go to the Internet and shop for any car . As long as you are keeping consistent with the features , you can find out what different dealers and private sellers would charge for it . An apples for apples comparison . But the thing is with life insurance , different companies specialize in underwriting different types of risk . Some are good for heart cases , other for cancer cases . Others only really want people with no history of serious illness at all . Not only that : your broker has to have a very good relationship with the carrier to get it to be very aggressive in applying its underwriting standards . You cant just call up the carrier on some website quote service and expect to get the rate on your screen . Many times the broker has to advocate on behalf of the client to make sure the rate quoted is the rate approved . It takes work . Really , the last thing you want is a typical rate . What you want is the rate that is the best for you . You can invest a little time with a broker who will pre-underwrite you , and youll find out in short order .
Whenever you are comparing advertised rates of fixed annuities , it is very important to know the details behind the advertised rate . There are a multitude of variables between different companies . Many companies offer `` bonus rates '' for new investors . These bonus rates look very attractive , but are easily misunderstood . Key questions to ask are : Does the advertised rate include a bonus ? If so , what are the details ? How long is the advertised rate locked in once you invest ? Is there a guaranteed minimum interest rate ? If so , what is it ? Is there a bail-out option if the earning rate drops significantly in the future ? What are the terms ? For the right person in the right situation a fixed annuity can be a very good investment . However properly comparing annuities is more involved than comparing simpler products such as CD 's .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Key Employee Life Insurance ?
Lets suppose you own a business . Obviously you cant do everything yourself , so you need to hire people with special skills . Collectively you can get to where you want to go . The people with special skills might include a high-ranking executive . Might also include a highly skilled technician . Perhaps a top salesman . All these people play roles that are key to the operation . And you , as the entrepreneur of the enterprise , are very much a key person too . This is not to say that people who are not key do not bring value to the company and are not important . If all the business needed was key people , why would you hire anybody else ? But key people are the ones whose loss would create the biggest problems . Sales could go down . Vendors might not get paid . Clients might get nervous about orders being filled . Banks might think twice about lending money . You need to protect your business against the loss of these people . If any or all of them disappeared tomorrow , you need to be sure that your business can go full speed ahead . Employees , clients , prospects , vendors , lenders , investors , and everyone else related to your business , need to be reassured that business will take place as usual . And that takes money . If you have the exact amount of money you need exactly when you need it , then you could tell people to not worry . Orders will get filled . Bills will get paid . You can take the time needed to find the right replacement . And you dont want to have to set up an investment program to cover these people . Nor do you want to have to borrow the money . You want this coverage to come as cheaply as possible without any hoops to jump through . That is what life insurance does when it is purchased for key person coverage .
The term Key employee or key man or business life insurance all deal with the same type of life insurance policy . It is a term or permanent life insurance policy owned and paid for by the companywith the company named as the beneficiary . The sole purpose is to recover a financial loss incurred by the sudden death of this `` key man or woman '' . The person is so important to the business success that a business could actually go under or have to restructure .
The death of a key employee or shareholder most often would affect the profits , financial strength and stability of the company . Creditors , customers , employees and suppliers could lose confidence in the business at the death of a key person , especially , if the key person is the owner . Key person life insurance is insurance , purchased by the business to deliver cash at death to provide solutions such as the loss of a key employee and for the funding of buy sell agreements between shareholders . In Canada , when a company owns and is beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefit is received tax free . The funds can then be used by the company for its purposes . The death benefit less the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -LRB- NCPI -RRB- can be paid out as a tax free dividend to surviving shareholders . With careful planning , the key person protection can be designed to also provide executive benefits . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Most companies have at least one person -LRB- e.g. the owner of the company -RRB- who 's loss can have a substantial impact on the business ' revenue . Upon this `` key-person 's '' death , someone else must be hired to carry on the same tasks performed earlier . Many company owners therefore insist on buying life insurance coverage to minimize the risk , and many lenders require that the business carry life insurance on the key person to protect their loans and investments in the company . The business would generally own the policy , pay the premiums , and be the beneficiary . Key person policies are often used to support a buy-sell agreement between business partners with the proceeds structured to purchase the deceased partner 's shares or interests in the company - the agreement would typically mandate that the deceased partner 's estate sell it 's stock to the remaining partners/shareholders and that the partners/shareholders purchase the interest for a specified price -LRB- theprice should help establish the value of the business for estate planning purposes -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
The death of a key employee or shareholder most often would affect the profits , financial strength and stability of the company . Creditors , customers , employees and suppliers could lose confidence in the business at the death of a key person , especially , if the key person is the owner . Key person life insurance is insurance , purchased by the business to deliver cash at death to provide solutions such as the loss of a key employee and for the funding of buy sell agreements between shareholders . In Canada , when a company owns and is beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefit is received tax free . The funds can then be used by the company for its purposes . The death benefit less the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -LRB- NCPI -RRB- can be paid out as a tax free dividend to surviving shareholders . With careful planning , the key person protection can be designed to also provide executive benefits . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Key man life insurance is for an employee in a business or organization whose loss would put a financial strain on that business or group . Some types of persons who should own key person insurance are top sales people , people who have much knowledge based on years of experience , managers of lots of employees , and/or key decision makers . All these positions take time to develop and to find the right person to replace that key employee . The key man insurance provides money to do the recruiting and operation while the key person is being replaced and trained .
Key Life Insurance , often called Key Man or Key Person Life Insurance , is a policy that is taken out on a `` key '' employee of a business . The business usually pays for the policy and receives the benefits so that it has the funds to look for a new employee and not suffer financially in the interim , if that key employee should pass .
With Key Person disability insurance , if a vital employee becomes disabled , the business will receive disability income to cover the financial loss of the missing employee . And if a business has more than one key employee whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then Key Person disability insurance can be purchased for more than one person in the business . Any business that would find it hard to replace a vital employee needs Key Person disability insurance . Much like the saying , if a business puts all its eggs in the basket of one person , it wont be able to sustain itself should that person become disabled .
Key Man DI -LRB- also known as Key Person DI -RRB- is a coverage that would pay benefits to a business to cover the financial loss if a vital employee became disabled due to an illness or injury . Any business that would find it hard to replace an employee , or any business that wouldnt be able to function without a specific employee , needs Key Man DI . And if a company had more than one key person whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then DI can be purchased for more than one Key Man . ''
A Key Man Life Insurance policy is life insurance that covers the life of key persons in a business . These are employees who represent the top producers and/or leadership in the company , and who would take some time to replace . Key Person insurance provides money to keep the business in the black while this new key employee is found . Key Man Life Insurance can be Term or Permanent , and it can be owned by the business or by the employer .
Split dollar is not a type of life insurance policy but rather , when used by a business , is an arrangement that allocates the policy benefits between the business and the key employee . Typically , the business assists the key employee by paying the premium while the key employee receives most of the policy benefits . The business ultimately recovers its total outlay from policy benefits . The employee receives a valuable life insurance benefit for a very low out of pocket cost .
If the employee is a `` key person '' in the business , it can be very costly for a business to lose him/her . The time spent in finding and training a new employee could put the business under . So providing life insurance that pays the business in the event that a key employee passes , can be extremely important . Some businesses provide group life insurance for all their employees . Rather than the death benefit going to the business , it is paid to employee 's family in the event of his/her death . This is a benefit that might draw good employees to apply or stay at a certain business , which is an important part of running a profitable business . It also can be very meaningful to the employee 's family if death occurs .
Some companies will take out life insurance on their key employee -LRB- s -RRB- so that the business would have the resources to keep operating while trying to replace that employee -LRB- s -RRB- , in the event of their passing . This is called Key Man or Key Person Insurance . Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI , for short -RRB- became popular during the 1980 's as a way to cover the entire pool of employees due to the tax shelter status given these policies by the IRS . Subsequent reforms give COLI tax favorability only if such coverage is purchased on top wage earners and if they are notified of the policy in advance , and further restrictions are in the pike . As such , life insurance policies that cover all employees in the business are much less common .
The corporation is either the total or partial beneficiary on the policy , and an employee or group of employees , owner or debtor is listed as the insured -LRB- s -RRB- . Fundamentally , COLI differs from group life insurance policies that are typically offered to most or all of the employees in a company , because this type of insurance is designed to protect the employees and their families and not the company itself . COLI can be structured in many different ways to accomplish many different objectives . One of the most common is to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as a split-dollar life insurance policy that allows the company to recoup its premium outlay into the policy by naming itself as the beneficiary for the amount of premium paid , with the remainder going to the employee who is the insured on the policy . Other forms of COLI include key person life insurance that pays the company a death benefit upon the death of a key employee , and buy-sell agreements that fund the buyout of a deceased partner or owner of a business . In many cases , the death benefit is used to buy some or all of the shares of company stock owned by the deceased -LRB- such as with a closely-held business -RRB- . COLI is also frequently used as a means of recovering the cost of funding various types of employee benefits .
A key employee for a 401k generally refers to top heavy rules for a defined benefit plan . If greater than 60 % of the present value of the cumulative accrued benefits of plan assets come from `` key employees '' , the plan is considered to be top heavy . A key employee is an employee that at any time during the year was 1 -RRB- someone who owned more than 5 % , 2 -RRB- a more than 1 % owner who was paid $ 150,000 or more or 3 -RRB- an officer that was compensated at more than $ 170,000 for 2014 . The IRS has a long list of guidelines -LRB- IRS 4.72.5 -RRB- for top-heavy plans and it is best to consult with someone who specializes in this area .
It is smart to consider life insurance . Life insurance provides financial security and piece of mind . It is unique in providing income tax free cash when it is needed the most . Life insurance offers protection , income replacement , and the chance to leave a legacy . With life insurance , you are protecting the people you care about the most . Life insurance can also protect the business you own . Some of the many things life insurance can do include : Pay burial and other final expenses . Replace income lost due to the death of a wage earner . Pay off debt obligations such as a car loan , credit cards , etc. . Pay off or reduce a home mortgage . Establish a fund to pay for domestic services lost at the death of the primary caregiver . Create an education fund . Enhance an estate to provide for children of a prior marriage . Satisfy divorce related obligations such as alimony or child support . Create a fund to provide care for a loved one with special needs . Pay legal and administrative costs incurred at the insureds death . Provide a source of liquidity to pay state and/or federal estate taxes . Mitigate the impact taxes can have on assets owned in trust . Replace loss due to income tax on Income in Respect of Decedent -LRB- IRD -RRB- assets such as annuities , IRAs , and qualified plan assets . Diminish the impact of marital deduction limitations of a surviving resident noncitizen spouse . Increase the value of transfers of generation-skipping , annual exclusion , and exemption gift amounts . Leave a charitable legacy . Replace wealth left to a charity . Equalize inheritances between business heirs and non-business heirs . Collateralize a business loan . Fund a buy-sell agreement . Stabilize a business at the death of a key employee or owner . Offset the loss of a key employee -LRB- at death -RRB- to the business . Establish a fund to retain key employees -LRB- such as stay-bonus , SERP , deferred compensation -RRB- . Facilitate an Employee Stock Ownership Plan -LRB- ESOP -RRB- repurchase obligation .
Most businesses have key employees who are impact players in the company . The company depends on their performance and they 're vital to the future of the business . Placing key person life insurance on them can protect the business from the death of a key employee and provide cash to recruit and train a new employee .
In business scenarios , key executives that head operations and drive sales would be selected to offer disability insurance as a benefit to the employee as well as key employee coverage for the firm . Most large firms use disability insurances an employee benefit to recruit and retain key players in the organization .
Along with private individuals , as mentioned above , business owners purchase DI as well . The benefit covers utilities , employee salaries , rent , etc. . Also , if a company relies on a specific employee , or if they 'd lose a substantial amount of income if one employee could no longer work , Key Person or Key Man Disability Insurance can be purchased . The benefit would be paid to the company to offset the cost of hiring another employee , or to help with revenue while the employee recovers .
Usually , the way Key Person Life Insurance works is that the employer or business takes out a life insurance policy on an important employee in the company , one that is vital to the success of the business and would need to be carefully replaced if he or she died . The employer or business pays the premium and and is the beneficiary . If death of the key employee occurs , the business has money to protect them from loss of production and solicit and train a new employee to replace the key person .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Buy A Life Insurance Policy On My Brother ?
Great question ! Insurance companies will only write a policy when it can be demonstrated that there will be a loss to you , should the insured pass away . So you could n't write a policy on the guy you met at the office , unless you could prove that you would lose income or assets if he were to pass away . The same would apply to your brother . Unless you can prove a monetary loss , it might be really hard to find a company that will issue a policy . The best way to do it ? Like Ms. Mace suggests , have your brother get his own policy , and you make the payments for it . If you need help doing that , please feel free to contact me , I 'm glad to help . Thanks for asking !
It depends upon the laws where you live and whether there is a pecuniary or monetary interest . Some jurisdictions will consider siblings to have an insurable interest , while others may not . An insurable interest means having a benefit associated with the continued life and good health of the insured individual . If you brother owes you money , or you rely on him for financial support then the chances of showing insurable interest are much stronger .
As Kevin stated , if your brother owes you money , or if you rely on your brother for financial support , those are reasons for which you may be allowed to buy life insurance on your brother . Another reason is if you and your brother own a business together . Getting life insurance on your brother would allow you to buy out his share from his spouse , if he would pass away . If you want to buy life insurance for your brother to cover his funeral and burial or cremation , a small policy like that may be permitted . If not , it could be easier to have your brother own the policy and you pay for it . It never hurts to ask from an agency that can shop around .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
As Kevin stated , if your brother owes you money , or if you rely on your brother for financial support , those are reasons for which you may be allowed to buy life insurance on your brother . Another reason is if you and your brother own a business together . Getting life insurance on your brother would allow you to buy out his share from his spouse , if he would pass away . If you want to buy life insurance for your brother to cover his funeral and burial or cremation , a small policy like that may be permitted . If not , it could be easier to have your brother own the policy and you pay for it . It never hurts to ask from an agency that can shop around .
I represented Primerica for over 12 years and know from experience that it is a good company and will pay death claims in a timely manner . The only death claim that I have paid in my career was to the widow of my brother-in-law that past away unexpectedly at the age of 38 . I delivered a check for $ 338,000 to my sister-in-law and her kids since I had replaced a whole life policy with a face of $ 25,000 a year earlier . Like most other companies , Prinerica is a solid company and will be around forever . The reason I left the company and went with my present company , Capital Choice Financial Group , was that I could represent many companies giving me a competitive edge in the marketplace . Also , Capital Choice represented the same concept of Buy Term and Invest the difference and was founded by the brother-in-law of the founder of Primerica .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
If your brother is a business partner with you , taking out life insurance policies on each other would be an excellent way for one of you to buy the other out , if one passed away . If your brother is disabled and you have been contributing regularly to his financial well being , you could take out a life insurance policy on your brother . Both to pay for his final expenses , and also to partially repay you for your generosity to him over the years . There are other situations where taking out life insurance on your brother is legitimate in world of life insurance . There are also some situations where taking out life insurance on your brother would not be allowed . Contact a reputable agency online or locally to discuss your particular scenario .
Did you know that this type of policy was first created by Dr. Marius Bernard , in 1983 in South Africa ? Dr. Bernard has a famous brother Dr. Christian Bernard who preformed the first heart transplant . Dr. Bernard saw that his brother was saving lives but destroying them financially . Group critical illness insurance is a supplemental health insurance program which is essentially a pool of money that will be given to you in lump sums for various illnesses such as stroke , heart aliments , paralysis , severe burns etc. . Depending on your illness you can receive different amounts of that pool of money . As an example , you could buy an amount of $ 50,000 which you could receive the entire amount if you had a severe stroke or a portion if you have a heart attack . The point is that once you receive the entire $ 50,000 your policy would be cancelled as all benefit had been paid out . Is it a good policy to buy ? Well I own one , with the idea being to make up deductibles and co-pays , if I have a covered problem , which are n't paid by my health insurance policy . Some other reasons to buy are loss of income or a quick remodel of your home if you need to use wheel chairs to get around .
Many siblings will buy life insurance on their brothers so that there are funds to use for funeral expenses when their brothers die . For larger face amounts , you would need to show that you and your brother share finances in some way . I.e. . You own a property or business together , you share living expenses , your brother owes you money , or vice versa .
If you and your brother are buying a business together , or live together , or have some other financial connection where his death would cause you financial harm , then you can take out life insurance on your brother . You could also take out a small final expense policy on him if he would rely on you to take care of his affairs if he would die . If you are unsure whether there is sufficient financial consideration for you to buy a life insurance policy on your brother , you can call an insurance website or agency to find out . You do n't need to go through the whole application process , first . These things can be determined ahead of time .
Yes . You can buy life insurance on your brother if several factors are met : 1 -RRB- He agrees to allow you to take out a life insurance policy on his life -LRB- evidenced by him signing the paperwork as the proposed insured -RRB- . 2 -RRB- There is an insurable interest for the coverage . 3 -RRB- The policy being applied for is suitable to the need - there are limits to how much coverage can be taken out a person -LRB- generally 20-30x income - exact maximum coverage allowance varies by carrier -RRB- . After discussing the prospect of buying the insurance with your brother , you will want to talk to an experienced life insurance broker who can go through everything with you , help you evaluate how much coverage is appropriate for what you 're trying to accomplish , review your brother 's medical history -LRB- this is very very important because the medical history determines the risk classification he qualifies for - the risk classification determines the premiums you will have to pay for the coverage -RRB- , provide the proper and most accurate quotes for the coverage , and get the coverage placed in force . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Are you renting your brother 's pickup for personal or business purpose ? If for personal use , your policy will be excess based to your brother policy . For example , if there is an accident , your brother 's policy will go first and if limits are exhausted , your insurance will provide coverage on the top of your brother 's policy limits . If you rent the truck for the business purpose , make sure you have Hired/Non-Owned coverage endorsement on your business liability coverage or commercial auto policy . This coverage usually runs at $ 100 - $ 200 per year and provide a great deal of coverage for cars you borrow , rent or hire to use in business . You can compare personal and business liability and auto insurance quotes on WEBSITELINK
I 'm almost afraid to answer this question but I will anyway . I can understand how you could feel that you 're owed something for all the time , money , and heartache you 've invested in your brother . Would money really make all that better ? It seems every family has one member who takes care of everyone else and it sounds like you 're that person in your family . I also believe that , eventually , you 'll be rewarded for it and it 'll probably be with something worth more than money . While you ca n't put insurance on your brother , he can surely buy some of his own and name you as the beneficiary . You can even pay the premiums if you 'd like but he has to make the decision and go through the process .
You can get a life insurance policy on your brother if you have an insurable interest . This could include being his custodian , being his business partner , being responsible for his debts , and other scenarios . It would be challenging to think of an instance when you would be denied the privilege of insuring your brother . Of course , your brother has to cooperate .
The short answer is YES , you are able to purchase life insurance on the life of your brother . The basic rule ormeasure in determining the legality of purchasing life insurance on another is `` Insurable Interest '' , in other words , ` Do you have an interest in the continuation of the insured 's life ? ' . The blanket explanation of insurable interest is a relationship through love , blood and business . Therefore , you could not go out and purchase a policy on a stranger as that would be considered a wagering contract . Secondly , after meeting insurable interest requirements , the next guideline is that you are limited in the amount of coverage you can purchase based upon the insured 's net worth . Simply put , if you brother does not have two pennies to rub together , you may have a difficult time purchasing coverage on his life . Specifically to your situation , it seems that you have met the basic requirements to purchase coverage on his life . However , in order to do so , you will need his permission meaning that he will need to co-sign the application for insurance . With the sensitive nature of your current relationship , the best way to present the need for insurance to your brother is that you wish to have enough coverage on his life to prepare for `` final expenses '' . This would include funeral expenses , probate expenses if he has any assets and any other unresolved , secured debt that could be passed on to his estate . Do not feel guilty for your thought process , it is a very wise way to consider and utilize such a valuable asset to protect yourself against the financial burden that our loved ones sometimes create .
Many family members and professional associates are eligible . Interestingly , I find that the majority of my clients designate a brother or sister as the trustee . That makes sense . After all , people tend to trust a close family member on life-and-death issues . When the insured is no longer around , a trustworthy soul is needed to handle the money . And also to take care of surviving family members . Siblings fit the bill . But it must be emphasized that trustees have a huge responsibility with regards to the policy inside the trust . They really need to make sure that it is audited on a regular basis to confirm it is performing as expected . You know how people sometimes lose track of their life insurance ? How sometimes it doesnt perform according to projections , and additional premium payments are needed ? Or it runs out of cash sooner than expected ? Or the death benefit gets reduced ? Well , if you are the trustee of your brother or sisters life insurance trust , you dont want any of this to happen . You very well could be liable . The insured set up the trust with a strategy designed to provide a certain amount of cash to certain people at certain times . Your job is to make sure the train arrives on schedule . If , for whatever reason , that policy under-performs , the buck could very well stop with you . You do not want that hot potato , both for financial as well as family reasons . You dont want to let the people down whom your sibling trusted you to help . So , if you are the trustee , make sure that policy is audited on a yearly basis , and make any changes that are necessary .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Great question ! Insurance companies will only write a policy when it can be demonstrated that there will be a loss to you , should the insured pass away . So you could n't write a policy on the guy you met at the office , unless you could prove that you would lose income or assets if he were to pass away . The same would apply to your brother . Unless you can prove a monetary loss , it might be really hard to find a company that will issue a policy . The best way to do it ? Like Ms. Mace suggests , have your brother get his own policy , and you make the payments for it . If you need help doing that , please feel free to contact me , I 'm glad to help . Thanks for asking !
Typically , a parent would add your brother to to a health insurance policy that they purchase and you are covered on . If you have a separate policy , you can help pay for coverage on your brother , but it would be a separate policy . If you are close to the same age , his rate should be similar to yours and perhaps lower , depending on health conditions .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is Renters Insurance Legally Required ?
Under an individual lease or rental agreement it could be required by the landlord which would make it legally required . As of today and to the best of my knowledge there are not any state or federal regulations on the books or in the works that require a person to renters insurance . Always contact a local agent to find out more about the requirements within your geographic location .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance is not required by law in California . I doubt that it is required in any state . That it is not required doesnt make it any less important . As a tenant you have legal liability for everything that takes place at the rented place . If someone is injured , you can be sued . Your personal property is not the responsibility of the landlord , it is yours . If there is a fire , your property can be reduced to smoke and no one is legally responsible to pay you for the loss . These are the reasons it just makes good sense to have a renters policy
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
When renting a home , the home owner needs to have Landlords Insurance to provide coverage for the Dwelling and Premises Liability . The renter needs to buy Renters Insurance to provide coverage for Personal Property & Family Liability . Although both the Landlords policy and the Renters policy are not required by law , it is advisable to be covered in the event of a claim . Many large property management companies and property owners do require tenants to purchase Renters Insurance as a condition to the Rental Agreement ; the reason for this is to avoid lengthy and cumbersome legal issues in the event of a claim attributable to negligence . For a small premium the Renters Insurance provides the tenant with Family Liability coverage which will offer defense and payout damages up to the policy limit . Liability coverage will offer protection for negligence that may lead to a claim -LRB- i.e. accidental fire , smoke , water damage etc. . . -RRB-
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
In some States , the Law requires for all Tenant Lease Contracts to include a clause requiring tenants to purchase and provide proof of Renters Insurance to the Landlord . In most States , this is not the case . However , a Landlord has the right to require a tenant to responsibly be insured as part of the agreement ; as long as both the Landlord and Tenant sign the Lease , it is a legal agreement . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and provides a huge protection to both the Landlord and the Tenant in the event of a claim . The minimum amount of Personal Liability is $ 100,000 on most contracts and has no associated deductible ; the minimum amount of Personal Property coverage could be as low as $ 20,000 to which the policy deductible will apply . In order to generate the lowest premium for those uninterested in coverage but required to purchase coverage , one should obtain a quote for the minimum liability limit , the minimum personal property coverage and the maximum deductible . Providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
My response to this question might be a little different . Landlords , or their legal counsel , often require tenants to provide a form of `` Renter 's '' insurance for a number of reasons . First , if a tenant has renter 's insurance , it may indicate they are prudent and responsible . Most would agree it is prudent and responsible for any residential or commercial tenant to maintain adequate property and liability insurance . Before most insurance companies issue an insurance policy , they screen potential insureds to make sure they are responsible citizens and have reasonably good credit . Requiring Renter 's insurance would provide the landlord some assurance the tenant was able to pass those tests . In addition , if a tenant 's negligence resulted in injury or damage to the landlord 's property or injury or damage to other tenants or their guests in the building , the tenant may be responsible for indemnifying the damaged parties . The tenant 's Renter 's insurance would provide some assurance the tenant or his insurer would have the resources to back up that obligation .
In a word , yes they can require renters insurance as a condition of their rental agreements . They do this to protect their interest in the rented property , of course , but it makes great sense to obtain renters insurance even if they do n't require it . Renters insurance protects you and your personal belongings from loss or legel action due to any action for which yo may be held legally liable .
There are no laws that I am aware of that require Renters Insurance . Your landlord , however , has the legal right to require that you carry Renters Insurance as a condition of the lease , since he owns the property . If the insurance is required in the lease and you fail to comply then the landlord has the right to evict you for breach of contract .
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is NOT a legal requirement however that does not mean it is not required to move into an apartment or house . The landlord can and usually does make this a requirement which protects you from loss of your material possessions in the event of a fire or other catastrophic event covered . Be sure to look at your options on the Renters Insurance . I recommend getting the replacement value type of coverage v. current value . Think about what it will cost to replace items like your TV -LRB- versus what it is currently worth -RRB- , your mattress and other bedroom furniture , etc. .
No it is not a legal requirement . Many lenders however will require mortgage life insurance to protect themselves . Also , there have been cases where a judge has required a divorced spouse to carry life insurance to cover a mortgage or protect minor children although these cases would depend on the situation . As a general rule however , you are not legally required to carry mortgage insurance .
Renters insurance is coverage that is designed for people who arent responsible for the residence . It is designed to cover the personal property of a renter . It is also designed to satisfy the requirements for legal liability insurance in case of physical injury or property damage . Most policyholders find the coverage to be very inexpensive especially considering the responsibilities that a renter has .
Entering business without appropriate liability insurance can result in financial consequences that will dwarf the premium that would be required to have coverage . Just because he is 16 years old will not relieve him of the financial responsibility in the event of an occurrence where someone is injured or property is damaged . I do n't buy into the notion that insurance gives a business credibility but I do agree that it is the best single method of protecting assets and the future ability to earn a living . At 16 years old , another issue develops and that is whether or not he meets legal requirements to start or open a business or can entered into contracts . And , because your son is not of a legal age , will his parents or legal guardian be responsible for any losses that occur in the operation of the business ? If a case can be made for the inclusion of parents or guardians into a claim or lawsuit , the stakes just went up dramatically . So , insurance is a minimum necessity . One other thought . Insurance carriers may not insure your son because of his age , but they are more likely to concern themselves with the combination of his age and lack of business experience . Many carriers having the best rates have the requirement of at least a few years of experience . While coverage may be available in a specialty insurance marketplace , our best carriers will generally have issues with a 16 year old new business customer first entering and insuring a business . Once again , a parent might be necessary to make the business insurance happen . But back to your question : Absolutely a yes on the need for insurance . Good luck .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Can I Find Out If Someone Has Auto Insurance ?
It used to be easy but with privacy protection laws in-force , it now takes some work . Without knowing the reason why you want the information , bear in mind that you will need to demonstrate a legal need for it . You can check with the local police department but you will most probably have to file a police report and provide a solid and legal reason for needing to know about another 's insurance situation . You might also check with your State motor vehicle administration but again , your request will not be honored unless you can provide a reason for your request that is in compliance with the laws .
If you are involved in an accident with another party , especially if it is their fault , it is always best to contact the local police in order to file an accident report . The investigating officer will among other things , ask to see that each of you have proof of car insurance , since in most states , having coverage is state law . The insurance company name and policy number will then be written into the officer 's report . You are entitled to a copy of that report and can therefore contact the other party 's listed company to open a claim with them . Provided that that process goes smoothly and you are not told that the policy had cancelled , they have coverage .
About the only way to verify whether or not someone has auto insurance is to ask them . If they have coverage they should be able to show you a proof of insurance card from their current carrier with the dates the policy is effective . Privacy laws prevent carriers from disclosing most information about their clients , with limited exceptions .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
I like to look at this question a little differently . There are basically three parts to your auto insurance policy . One part covers you if you hurt somebody -LRB- or something -RRB- . A second part covers you and your family if someone hurts you and does n't have any insurance or not enough to reimburse you for your injuries/suffering/lost earnings . A third part covers the car you may be driving should it be damaged . How much coverage would you expect someone to have if they hurt you or a family member ? That is a good guide for how much liability coverage you should consider . Your liability limit for others and uninsured/under-insured motorists limit for you should be consistent . If someone or something damaged your car , would you want to be reimbursed ? If so , your auto insurance should include comprehensive and collision coverage . Older fully paid car ? Still may be worth several thousand dollars and well worth insuring . It 's better to have a higher deductible than no coverage at all . If your insurance coverage meets these tests , this may be the best insurance coverage for you . Then I like to consider insurers who will also provide my homeowner 's / tenant 's coverage through a respected local agent with reasonably competitive premiums .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
Find a good local experienced independent agent in your area who can sit down with you , discuss your needs and goals and help you find the plan that is affordable for you . Do not bow to high pressure sales tactics . Find someone you are comfortable with . You may want to interview a few agents before deciding on the one you want to do business with . A good agent will be looking out for YOUR interests . Find someone who has been in the business for a while , who knows the plans and options available to you .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
A life insurance policy could be denied for any of the following reasons : 1 -RRB- The applicant 's health was not controlled . This can be anything from someone with diabetes having an A1C over 10 , to someone with cancer having only months to live . 2 -RRB- The applicant 's health has not been stable for a certain length of time . This can range from someone who had very high blood pressure and only been on medication for one month , to someone with MS who has had a recent major exacerbation . 3 -RRB- The applicant is planning to have major medical testing or procedure done in the near future . In other words , if your doctor has scheduled a test to see if you have Parkinson 's , you will need to wait until after the test to apply . If you have gastric bypass surgery scheduled in two months , the insurance company will ask that you wait until after your surgery to apply . 4 -RRB- The applicant has had a recent bankruptcy that has not been discharged , has undergone recent drug or alcohol treatment , has had numerous traffic violations in the past year , or other non-health related risk factors . The above mostly relate to medically underwritten policies . There are simplified issue policies -LRB- that do not require an exam -RRB- and guaranteed issued policies -LRB- that do not have any requirements -RRB- that can be obtained when a medically underwritten policy will not work . Simplified and guaranteed issue policies do have restrictions on face amounts , you must be in a certain age range to get them , and they are not available in every state . Thus , some people do apply for simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies and get declined simply because they do not fit the age , or it is not offered in their state . This is most common for persons applying by mail or online . If you enlist the help of a good agent , you can avoid many declines by having proper guidance in the first place .
Even if someone has car insurance , if you choose to sue them you have to file in small claims court unless this is a much larger claim . I would reach out to an attorney to get more details . When someone has insurance , usually that company will give you a settlement however sometimes what they offer is not what you can get or should be awarded which you end up in court anyway . There are some great attorneys that specialize in accidents . I do not know what state you are in so I can not make a recommendation but just do some homework . Get someone that is reputable . Good Luck .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Home insurance coverage should be consistent with other coverage you purchase , like auto insurance . Similar amounts of insurance , enough to cover the cost to repair or replace your home and other property . Similar liability limits , in case your negligence injures someone . Similar perils , if your car is covered for `` any '' damage , your home and property should be as well . Similar deductibles , I suggest deductibles not less than $ 1000 . And it is not a bad idea to combine coverage with the same insurer whenever possible . Its better to deal with someone you already know and trust.If you do n't , it may be a good time to find new auto insurance as well .
This depends upon your state and your insurance carrier . I will first speak generally then about the Michigan rules . General : anyone who is a family member and living in your home is covered by your auto insurance . Anyone who is borrowing your car with your permission is covered . Those are the major general coverage . Michigan : no-fault insurance goes like this 1 . owner of the car , 2 . driver of the car , 3 . someone in the car , 4 . a household family member who has no-fault . The general trend in Michigan is to find someone with insurance and make a claim against it , to prevent a mini-tort . I hope this helps .
In my personal experience , all the companies I have worked with want to provide a service for their clients and do it honestly . They try hard to be fair and sometimes I have seen them bend in favor of the client . I think what people hear are the few times someone has been `` wronged '' by the company . From my own personal experience in such a case , I can say that companies can not air their side of the story . With one company I used to work with , the company offered a fair offer to settle in a small kitchen fire . The client refused and wanted the entire house rebuilt . The client went public about how the company would was not making a good offer . Over a year later , the community realized how unreasonable the client was being and his support dwindled quickly . The company had no recourse . The agents had no recourse . They could not talk about the details due to privacy issues . Meanwhile , the client is making every effort he can to publically trash the company . There are some situations where the company has to go by what the contract states and there may be some situation where it may not feel `` right '' to the client , but the company has to honor the contract . With all that said , I would recommend working with a broker to help you find an insurance company and also help fight for you in those situations where you feel like you have been wronged . Having a broker who is familiar with the people in the company will help your case more than you can imagine .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will My Health Insurance Cover Gastric Bypass ?
Gastric bypass and other forms of bariatric surgery intended to promote weight loss may be covered by your health insurance plan . Those who are morbidly obese and have tried other forms of weight loss without success may be approved for gastric bypass . Your doctor must document your condition and history and certify that you are healthy enough to survive surgery .
Medicare may pay for gastric bypass . Certain conditions must be met , such as a BMI of 35 + , presence of a health condition related to being overweight , and no other medical options expected to work . There will be a psychological evaluation done to see if gastric bypass is right for you . As with other Medicare benefits , the gastric bypass must be done in a Medicare approved surgery and by a Medicare approved provider .
Most CIGNA health policies will cover gastric bypass surgery . However , the reader should note that CIGNA also administers self-funded health plans where the employer can define many elements of coverage and that it is possible that some much older fully insured plans still exist where such surgery was excluded or significantly limited . So check your certificate of coverage first or call CIGNA member services for guidance on this issue for your specific policy . In general terms , while gastric bypass surgery is covered , it is as more of a last resort than as a first course of action because this is a serious surgical procedure that is not without complications . The candidate will have to meet several criteria for pre-approval by CIGNA for this procedure to be approved for coverage and you will have to show that other , less invasive methods of weight loss have been tried and found to be ineffective .
It might depending on the reason for the Gastric Bypass . Most companies will only pay for any procedure if it is medically necessary . If the Gastric Bypass is more cosmetic and is used simply for a weight loss strategy then if may not be covered . Check with your insurance company or have your doctor do so before agreeing to the surgery .
Medicare does not cover liposuction as its considered a cosmetic procedure , even if you have an underlying medical condition related to weight . Some bariatric surgeries may be covered depending on medical necessity , such as a gastric bypass or gastric banding . If youre unsure whether your specific circumstances for a procedure would be covered by Medicare , you can contact Medicare directly to find out if the procedure would be covered . When procedures are covered by Medicare , they typically only pay for about 80 % of the covered healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you do not have one in place already , I would suggest considering the purchase of one . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will pay for gastric sleeve , gastric bypass , lap band , or duodenal switch for weight loss , under certain conditions . There must be a health problem associated with being obese , such as sleep apnea or type 2 diabetes . The condition of being overweight must have existed for at least 5 years . You must pass a psychological evaluation , have tried at least one other weight loss program that has failed , and other illnesses as the cause of your obesity must be ruled out . You also need a BMI of over 35 to be approved for Medicare gastric sleeve surgery .
Some group health insurance plans will cover bariatric surgery including bypass and lap band . In a few states individual major medical plans are required by law to cover gastric bypass surgery . If you are morbidly obese and looking for a plan that specifically covers the surgery you may be denied coverage .
Gastric bypass and other forms of bariatric surgery intended to promote weight loss may be covered by your health insurance plan . Those who are morbidly obese and have tried other forms of weight loss without success may be approved for gastric bypass . Your doctor must document your condition and history and certify that you are healthy enough to survive surgery .
In general , if your primary care physician deems a gastric bypass as a medically necessary procedure , your health insurance plan should cover a percentage of the expenses - the exact percentage of the bill that the carrier will pay for is going to vary from plan to plan and carrier to carrier . Contact an insurance agent to review available health plans from multiple carriers in your zip code .
Medicare will cover weight loss programs when weight has a direct impact on health . Some health conditions that may be alleviated by weight loss are sleep apnea , hypertension , joint pain , and diabetes type 2 . Medicare will pay for 3 hours of weight management counseling the first year and two hours of counseling each year after that . If further treatment is needed , Medicare can provide more , including gastric bypass surgery , if needed .
Medicare covers some weight loss programs when medically necessary . There must be a health condition that would be alleviated by weight loss in order for Medicare to pay . The program can include counseling , or , if more is needed , Medicare may pay for more options , including gastric bypass surgery under certain conditions .
A gastric bypass is a type of bariatric surgery which many plans will cover if the procedure is determined to be medically necessary by your physician . Some plans may have bariatric surgery included in the coverage and others may have bariatric surgery coverage available as an option to add to the plan . Contact your agent or the carrier directly to see if it would be covered under your plan .
Medicare can cover gastric bypass surgery under certain conditions . Some of those are : 1 -RRB- BMI must be 35 or greater . 2 -RRB- There must be at least one health condition related to weight . 3 -RRB- There must be documentation of failure to lose weight by other methods . 4 -RRB- A psychological evaluation is required . 5 -RRB- Other medical treatments for weight loss have been ruled out . 6 -RRB- The provider and type of surgery must be approved by Medicare .
Bariatric surgery -LRB- lap band , gastric bypass -RRB- can be a covered expense under Medicare in some situations . If your doctor certifies that you are morbidly obese and other forms of weight loss have not been successful , you may be considered a surgical candidate if you are healthy enough to survive the surgery .
In some cases you may qualify for a covered gastric bypass under Medicare . Your doctor must attest that you are morbidly obese and other methods of weight loss have not been effective . Surgery can be an option if you are otherwise healthy enough to survive the surgery . If you are under 65 and morbidly obese you may qualify for SSDI and Medicare .
Some Medicare patients will qualify for gastric bypass or lap band surgery . Your doctor must have certified that you are morbidly obese , other methods of weight loss have been tried and failed . Surgery should be considered based on your overall health . Morbid obesity is considered a disabling condition under Social Security , so some on SSDI may qualify for Medicare coverage if you are under the age of 65
Medicare provides coverage for some bariatric surgical procedures -LRB- such as a gastric bypass -RRB- . For Medicare to cover the procedure , you must meet certain conditions related to obesity . You 'll likely want to review your coverage before getting the procedure done to look at the cost you may be responsible for -LRB- e.g. do you have Medicare Part A & B , a Medicare supplement plan , etc. -RRB- . I recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker , if you want to review your options to add a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to your Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- coverage .
A life insurance policy could be denied for any of the following reasons : 1 -RRB- The applicant 's health was not controlled . This can be anything from someone with diabetes having an A1C over 10 , to someone with cancer having only months to live . 2 -RRB- The applicant 's health has not been stable for a certain length of time . This can range from someone who had very high blood pressure and only been on medication for one month , to someone with MS who has had a recent major exacerbation . 3 -RRB- The applicant is planning to have major medical testing or procedure done in the near future . In other words , if your doctor has scheduled a test to see if you have Parkinson 's , you will need to wait until after the test to apply . If you have gastric bypass surgery scheduled in two months , the insurance company will ask that you wait until after your surgery to apply . 4 -RRB- The applicant has had a recent bankruptcy that has not been discharged , has undergone recent drug or alcohol treatment , has had numerous traffic violations in the past year , or other non-health related risk factors . The above mostly relate to medically underwritten policies . There are simplified issue policies -LRB- that do not require an exam -RRB- and guaranteed issued policies -LRB- that do not have any requirements -RRB- that can be obtained when a medically underwritten policy will not work . Simplified and guaranteed issue policies do have restrictions on face amounts , you must be in a certain age range to get them , and they are not available in every state . Thus , some people do apply for simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies and get declined simply because they do not fit the age , or it is not offered in their state . This is most common for persons applying by mail or online . If you enlist the help of a good agent , you can avoid many declines by having proper guidance in the first place .
Gastric Bypass surgery may be covered by your health insurance carrier if it is deemed to be medically necessary . For this type of surgery medically necessary usually means morbidly obese where an individual is more than 100 pounds overweight . Surgeons that perform this type of surgery usually understand the rules and they can assist you with further information . In addition you should refer to your Evidence of Coverage that spells out what is and is not covered .
Medicare will pay for laparoscopic adjustable gastric band if the following three conditions are met : 1 -RRB- You must have a BMI of 35 or over at the time of surgery ; 2 -RRB- You must have a qualifying health condition associated with your being overweight that losing weight through gastric banding would help ; and 3 -RRB- You must complete a 6 month Physician Supervised Weight Loss Program proximate to the time of the surgery .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What are my options if insurance carrier refuses to add my teen daughter to family auto policy ?
Actually , at least here in Connecticut , only licensed drivers need to be added to your policy . Your daughter just has her learners ' permit so as such is not yet a licensed driver . I happen to represent Nationwide and our auto policy automatically covers our clients and their children as they are learning to drive the family car -LRB- s -RRB- . I think that perhaps your agent just needs to check the terms and conditions of your particular policy . You did the right thing by being proactive and advising your agent that she is learning to drive .
All licensed drivers must appear named on your auto policy . If a company refuses to insure your vehicle if a particular driver operates the vehicle , they do that by offering exclusion . Coverage is suspended if that driver operates that vehicle . We often have drivers who are excluded and we secure coverage with another company that does insured such drivers making that driver the primary driver on one of the cars .
Your auto insurance goes up for several reasons . For example , if you add a new car to the policy , or add a teen-age driver , your premiums will increase . Also , if any driver covered on your policy has an at-fault accident , and damages are paid , there is a chance that your rate will increase . However , many policies will `` forgive '' the first at-fault accident , depending on how long you have been insured with that carrier . And of course , as the cost of repair to vehicles increases and we see increases in litigation costs , rates could go up . So ... what do you , the consumer do about this ? Utilize the phrase `` We Shop And You Save . '' That is ... let an experienced broker do all of the hard work for you so you can simply review the best offers . If you decide to apply for a lower rate , the broker and/or their website will be there to help you complete the simple process .
Teen drivers are among the most expensive to insure , because they have the most tickets and accidents . A 17 year old can reduce her auto insurance by 1 -RRB- comparing prices , 2 -RRB- buying an older car that does not need comprehensive and collision -LRB- full coverage -RRB- , and 3 -RRB- by driving fewer miles in a year . Some kinds of cars are more dangerous and therefore more expensive to insure , so make sure you check insurance rates before you purchase a vehicle . A teen driver may also be excluded from having an insurance policy on his own , so it usually makes sense to join a family policy . You would also want to take advantage of any multi-car or multi-line discounts offered by your insurance company . These would be the same way that any driver can reduce her insurance rates , but for the teen driver it is particularly important to follow these steps . In addition , a clean driving record is paramount . So drive carefully and those rates will go down over time .
When you have a loan on a vehicle , your loan contract will require you to carry coverage on the vehicle itself which is known as physical damage coverage . Physical damage comes in the form of comprehensive and collision . In general , collision is anything you collide or have an upset with and comprehensive is everything else . Basically , the lienholder wants their interest protected which is the car . When a lienholder is listed , the insurance company is obligated to let them know if this coverage is dropped . If the coverage is removed , the lienholder , contractually , has a right to obtain coverage on its own and to add the cost to the amount of your loan . Adding teen drivers to a household can be expensive since they are inexperienced behind the wheel and are statistically more likely to have an accident . Check with your agent to see if any additional discounts are available with a youthful driver . For example , many companies offer a good student discount if the teen driver averages a B or better in school .
USAA is a very good and large insurer that operates as an auto insurer and as such may be higher or lower than a competitor . A few years ago my daughter moved from USAA to another independent agency company and was able to buy a renters policy , and auto policy and an umbrella all for less than her USAA auto policy . All auto insurance is regulated by individual states , so you can expect that an usurer can reflect its appetite for auto insurance in that state in its pricing . No company can be the least expensive in every state for every set of conditions . That is not a realistic expectation . You should be aware too that insurers often build elaborate rating algorithms which can produce several million price points across their business in a particular state . So your carrier may believe that a 16 year old with Corvette is not insurable to that carrier while another insurer might say the exposure is fine since they are exacting what they consider an adequate rate for the exposure .
Children can be covered under an existing health insurance plan the moment they are born . Dependent children can stay on a parent 's health plan until age 26 . Many children in America are covered under their State 's Medicaid -LRB- or comparable -RRB- program due to financial constraints of the family . However , everyone has the right to purchase coverage on of off exchange as long as they have the means to pay for it . Having just had a baby girl only 2 months ago our Daughter was immediately put on to our group health plan through my Wife 's employer and we had 30 days to decide whether we wanted to pay the additional premium and add her .
Prior to 2014 it was reasonable to anticipate annual increases in group and individual health insurance in the high single digits to low teen 's range . Though , of course , these are just generalized averages and a host of other factors could move rates higher or , in rarer instances , lower . We have already seen the base cost of health insurance increase fairly substantially in 2014 due to the implementation of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . The effect was especially pronounced in the individual health insurance market of almost every state due to the mandatory addition of new benefits , the move to the community rating approach , the elimination of underwriting and adjusting rates for risk , and making all policies guaranteed to be issued without pre-existing condition limitations or exclusions . In mid-2014 we are just now beginning to receive health insurance companies filings for their proposed 2015 rates . While the rate filings vary from state to state and from insurance carrier to insurance carrier , individual health insurance rate increases in the teens to 25 % or more are being reported in many areas across the nation . In some limited instances though , you are seeing some filings requesting rate reductions but these are pretty rare . Therefore , most people should be prepared to see their rates for individual health insurance increase meaningfully again in 2015 , though this effect may be hidden to some extent for those persons who qualify for premium tax subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Many small business groups are also seeing substantial rate increases in their renewal actions for the 2014-2015 benefit year . Increases of 20 % to 40 % are not uncommon .
This is an extremely sensitive topic . The death of a spouse can be life-shattering . A suicide can make it almost unbearable . Not too long ago a friend and client committed suicide . She had been going through a tough spell emotionally , and then almost out of the blue took her own life . Left behind a loving husband and three young boys . Very , very sad . I expedited the claim , as is my usual practice . This job is usually tough , and the fact that her family and mine are friendly made it really hard . My friend , her surviving husband , was so upset he could n't even complete the claim form . I did it for him . The insurance carrier paid the claim as the policy was over two years old . That is standard practice . Will they never pay before then ? I can say that I know of a case with a very high-profile insured who apparently committed suicide just a year after his policies were issued -LRB- he had several - lots of coverage -RRB- . The carriers , of course , initially refused to pay . The insured 's lawyers eventually convinced them to do so : why would they want the bad publicity of not paying a claim ? Will they always pay after two years ? My own feeling is yes , generally , but suspicious circumstances may interfere . If the carrier has reason to believe that this tragic event had been planned to take place right after the two-year anniversary . . Sometimes life is like a mystery novel .
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
Good Question your teen must have a driver license . Some companies have better rate than other for young drivers and give discounts such as good student , teen driving education and other discount . Check with your current provider and also call a local insurance broker who can shop around for the best rate for your new driver .
I know of one exception where this is acceptable and only a few insurance carriers will allow this . Lets say for example Daddy buys his daughter a car but the car is registered to Daddy . The daughter goes and purchases her own policy and insures the car that is not in her name . As long as this is the daughters primary car and you disclose the Dad owns the car this may be acceptable . Dad will be listed as either a driver or excluded but the daughter in this case can buy an insurance policy and not own the car . Again everything must be disclosed .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There 's no doubt about it . Car insurance for teenage drivers is expensive ! New drivers are 5 times more likely to have an accident . The good news is there are ways to lower your cost without sacrificing coverage . The biggest mistake I see parents make is reducing coverage when they add their son or daughter . If your child has an accident the parents will be sued , not the child . If you are going buy a car for your child buy an older vehicle and stay away from sport cars . A Mustang GT is not a good option for lowering your cost . If you are not going to buy a vehicle and have more drivers than cars , then you can list your child as an `` occasional driver '' . Most companies also offer Good Student Discounts and a discount for completing driver 's education so make sure you inquire about both of these for additional savings .
Find the cheapest car insurance for young drivers ? Save hundreds of dollars on your rates . That 's the goal of many parents an teen drivers and that 's why an experienced broker -LRB- and our websites -RRB- is the best resource for saving money . It 's important to shop the right way , quickly compare your best options and start saving . It can be done if you have access to all of the most affordable prices that are offered . That 's where an experienced broker helps .
In Montana you can not legally own a car titled in your name only you would have to have an adult on the title . In that case they would have insure the car or you can get insurance but you would have to list the adult as a driver . also which would make the rates much lower then on your own . The carriers that we use at our agency the average teen with a clean driving record cost about 100 a month with liability only on most 4 door cars trucks are a bit more . . I would talk to a local agent and find out what your state guidelines are
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
First , the Reduced Paid Up feature of your policy allows you to stop making premium payments and accept a reduced paid up option for whatever the reduced face amount is at the time you utilize the option . For example if your 20 year old $ 20,000 policy has a Reduced Paid Up of $ 12,000 and you utilize the option you would have a paid up policy of $ 12,000 with no further premium payments required . If the amount of the reduced paid up insurance is sufficient for your personal needs , you could use the money you paid for your policy and pay premiums on a policy for your daughter . This is not complicated at all and replacement is not an issue since you are keeping your policy . The Reduced Paid Up option does not allow for any up front cash however other than the money you save on premiums . Some Mutual companies that pay dividends . You could take the dividends in cash and use them to help pay for a policy if you have a policy that pays dividends . You could take a loan on the cash value of your policy but I really do not recommend doing that since the loan will reduce your death benefit or you could cash surrender a couple of policies if you do not need the insurance .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Disability Insurance Elimination Period ?
The Disability Insurance elimination period is the time between becoming disabled and receiving your Disability Insurance payments . The longer the elimination period , the lower the Disability Insurance premium usually is , so many people choose an elimination period of 90 days for Long Term Disability Insurance . That means that you would have to have been unable to work for 90 consecutive days before your Disability payments would start being paid to you .
The terms of purchasing long term disability that you should be familiar with are these . Elimination period is the time between you are diagnosed by a doctor that you are medically disabled and the time you begin to receive benefits . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days . The rule of thumb is the longer the elimination period the lower your premiums . Most good disability insurance carriers do go back and pay you from the first day of disability once the elimination period has been satisfied in a lump sum amount . Benefit period is another term to be familiar with as well . This is the period in which benefits will be paid to you once they commence . Common benefit periods are 2 years , 5 years , 10 years , 20 years or age 65 and 67 years old . I would recommend choosing the age versus years . If you are permanently disabled at a young age , you do not want to lose your benefits before becoming eligible for social security . The last term is future purchase options . This allows you to purchase more disability as your income increases without proof of insurability . In other words , you will not be reunderwritten . During your work life you will probably earn more money because of your increase knowledge and skills . This option allows you to insure that aspect .
Similar to disability income insurance , long-term care insurance has an `` elimination period '' . This is like a `` time deductible '' during which one has to pay out-of-pocket for care costs while satisfying the elimination period . Elimination periods are chosen by the applicant and are usually 30 - , 60 - , 90 - , 180 - , or 365-days . The longer the elimination period , the lower the premium.Some carriers provide a 0-day elimination period for home care , either as part of the policy or as an extra-cost add-on rider . If a person goes on claim at home , they may receive approved claim payments -LRB- reimbursement plan -RRB- or cash -LRB- indemnity plan -RRB- as soon as they are declared eligible for payment by the carrier . The contract indicates what the insured needs to submit to the carrier in order to be approved for payment of care costs or to receive a cash payout.There are two ways an elimination period may be satisfied : - Service Days . The insured must pay for care on any given day in order to satisfy one day of the elimination period . For example , the insured has chosen a 90 day elimination period . The insured must pay for long-term care services out-of-pocket for a total of 90 days -LRB- they do not have to be consecutive -RRB- before the elimination period is satisfied . If the person is paying for home care , satisfying the elimination period could take longer than 90 consecutive days if care is not needed on any given day or days . Carriers may have different ways of calculating the fulfillment of the elimination period using the `` service days '' method . - Calendar days . The elimination period is satisfied when a majority of days during the elimination period required care and the insured paid out of pocket . In other words , the insured does not have satisfy the elimination period with days where services were paid out of pocket . Each carrier defines how the elimination period is satisfied using the calendar day method . This method is often offered as an additional cost rider.If a person goes immediately into a full-service nursing facility , the elimination period will be fulfilled as care is received . All facility care will need to be paid out-of-pocket by the insured or the insured 's family during that period of time . It wo n't matter that much which type of elimination fulfillment method is used in such a case unless the person leaves the facility before the elimination period is fully satisfied.Some carriers do not offer a calendar day method for satisfying the elimination period . Some have a choice between the two . Some carriers only have a calendar day elimination period . Once the elimination period is satisfied in full , it does not have to be satisfied again . Since the way a carrier allows for the fulfillment of the elimination period can be the difference in hundreds - if not thousands - of dollars in out-of-pocket payments , the prospect for long-term care insurance should make this a priority question before choosing a carrier . Be sure that you read the section of a specimen or sample policy on `` Payment of Claims '' so that you understand how the proposed insurance company defines `` when long-term insurance kicks in '' .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Long term disability begins after satisfying the policy elimination period . Every policy is different . The elimination period describes the length of time you must be disabled and under the care of a physician , before benefit payments begin . You choose the elimination period at time of purchase . Short elimination periods have higher premiums , than longer elimination periods . Check your policy to determine what elimination period fit your budget .
I am not sure what you mean by `` functions '' . Disability insurance is designed to pay a percentage of your income , usually between 60 % and 80 % if you become disabled due to an injury or accident . You choose an elimination period which acts as a deductible . The elimination period is the period of time that goes by after you become disabled before the insurance begins to pay . The longer the elimination period the lower the premium . Each company has options as far as the elimination period , most common for Short Term disability might seven days sickness and zero days accident but this can vary according to circumstances . Short Term disability will provide income for the period of time specified in the policy , usually not more than a year or two , but again , that varies .
The terms of purchasing long term disability that you should be familiar with are these . Elimination period is the time between you are diagnosed by a doctor that you are medically disabled and the time you begin to receive benefits . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days . The rule of thumb is the longer the elimination period the lower your premiums . Most good disability insurance carriers do go back and pay you from the first day of disability once the elimination period has been satisfied in a lump sum amount . Benefit period is another term to be familiar with as well . This is the period in which benefits will be paid to you once they commence . Common benefit periods are 2 years , 5 years , 10 years , 20 years or age 65 and 67 years old . I would recommend choosing the age versus years . If you are permanently disabled at a young age , you do not want to lose your benefits before becoming eligible for social security . The last term is future purchase options . This allows you to purchase more disability as your income increases without proof of insurability . In other words , you will not be reunderwritten . During your work life you will probably earn more money because of your increase knowledge and skills . This option allows you to insure that aspect .
The elimination period on disability insurance is the specified period from which the disability is medically diagnosed and the insured is eligible to start receiving benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower the premiums . On short term disability insurance plans elimination periods can be as little as days or weeks . On long term disability plans can vary from 30-45-60-90-180-360 days . Most good disability plans do go back to day one and pay the entire period once the elimination period has been met in a lump sum .
Just a quick note as I read another post and need to clarify an incorrect statement regarding elimination periods . YOU are NOT reimbursed for your choice of elimination period . If you choose a 60 day elimination period , your benefits start on the 61st day and payment is usually made on the 91st day and monthly there after . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . The elimination period is like choosing your deductible on your health , home or auto insurance . It is the time you are willing to self insure your situation . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . Your choice of elimination period effects your premiums .
Long Term Disability Insurance will start paying the benefit to the disabled employee after the waiting period -LRB- elimination period -RRB- has been satisfied . The most common elimination period chosen for Long Term Disability Insurance is 3 months , but it can be shorter or longer . The shorter the elimination period , the lower the premium . The countdown for the waiting period usually starts on the day of the injury or illness , but if a minor illness has developed into a major one , the elimination period might not start to be satisfied until that progression has taken place . Each policy will spell out that criteria to review ahead of time .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
The elimination period for Disability Insurance is the waiting period between the time the disability occurs , and the time the insurance benefit begins to be paid . The elimination period is one of the variables of a Disability Insurance policy that can be adjusted to lower premiums -LRB- by making the elimination period longer -RRB- . If the applicant has very little savings on hand , they may want to pay more premium and buy a policy with a shorter elimination period .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
The elimination period in Disability Insurance is the period of time between becoming disabled and when benefits begin to be paid to the disabled employee . With Long Term Disability , a period of one to six months is usually selected as the elimination period . Generally , the shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium paid for the policy .
The elimination period is chosen at the time of application for the DI policy and represents a kind of `` time deductible '' that must be fulfilled before a claim is paid . The clock starts ticking when the carrier is informed in writing by a medical professional that the insured person has suffered a debilitating accident , developed a medical condition , or contracted a serious illness that is likely to last longer than the elimination period chosen . Thefirst dayof fulfillment of the elimination period typically begins at the date-of-onset of the debilitating event , although that actual date-of-onset is subject to the decision of the insurance company after reviewing medical records . Claims , i.e. a check for the maximum monthly benefit for income replacement , would usually not arrive until 30 days after the completion of the elimination period . For example , say the injured or sick insured has a 90-day elimination period . The income replacement check would arrive 30 days later , or 120 days from the date-of-onset . In the meantime , the insured would be responsible for paying bills during that four month period . So , serious discussion needs to take place at application time about how long of an elimination period should be applied for understanding that reality . The insured shouldmake sure that a liquid asset account be available at all times for such expenses , and/or a short-term DI policy should be in place , and/or a sufficient amount of sick leave and vacation be saved up , or a combination of all those accommodations .
What is elimination period in long term care insurance ? The elimination period is the amount of time you choose to self insure the situation before the long term care insurance kicks in to cover costs . The elimination period gives you options about how soon your long term care kicks in . The shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium . If you can extend your elimination period , usually you 'll see a considerable reduction in cost .
The elimination period for Disability Insurance is the amount of time between the event of becoming disabled , and the time when the benefit starts being received . People choose elimination periods based on their budget -LRB- the longer the elimination period , the lower the policy premium -RRB- and on the funds they have saved up -LRB- if someone does not have over one month of income in savings , it would be wise to get a Disability Insurance policy with a one month or less elimination period -RRB- .
I believe you are asking when the disability insurance benefits begin . All disability policies have a waiting period called the elimination period . This can be found on the declaration page in your policy . The elimination period is the period of time between a medical diagnosis of the disability and when benefits begin to pay to the insured . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days .
The accumulation period in a disability insurance policy is the time frame during which your elimination period must be satisfied . E.g. . You have an elimination period of one month and an accumulation period of three months . You break your leg , are out of work a week ; go back to work for a month ; your leg is n't healing correctly ; you have to have surgery to reset it ; you are out of work for 3 weeks and not sure when you get to go back . At this point your Disability policy will start paying because you satisfied the one month elimination period during the three month accumulation period .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Are Life Insurance Proceeds Protected From Creditors In Indiana ?
When a beneficiary in Indiana collects the death benefit from a life insurance policy upon the death of the insured person , the life insurance proceeds are protected from creditors in Indiana . Creditors could go after the life insurance proceeds if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debts of the Insured . They could also collect on the life insurance money if the beneficiary was left to the estate .
When a beneficiary in Indiana collects the death benefit from a life insurance policy upon the death of the insured person , the life insurance proceeds are protected from creditors in Indiana . Creditors could go after the life insurance proceeds if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debts of the Insured . They could also collect on the life insurance money if the beneficiary was left to the estate .
A spendthrift clause in some life insurance policies is intended to protect the beneficiary of the policy proceeds from creditors by paying the policy proceeds as periodic income rather than in a lump sum . Some policies allow the policy owner to select this settlement option for the beneficiary . Otherwise , the beneficiary selects this . The payout could be arranged as a fixed payment for as long as the money lasts or for a fixed period of time . The proceeds are then usually protected from creditors . Creditor protection via life insurance varies by state and may provide only limited protection . Contact your legal adviser for more on how this might apply in your situation .
While it appears simple on its face , the life insurance exemption from creditor claims can be very confusing . It is the opinion of some attorneys who specialize in life insurance law that the only way to truly protect life insurance proceeds from creditors of the insured is to have the policy owned by an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . Similarly , the only way to protect the proceeds form the creditors of the beneficiary is to have the proceeds paid into a discretionary spendthrift trust instead of directly to the beneficiary . Obviously these are issues that should be discussed with a qualified estate planning attorney . If you do n't know one , chances are that your life insurance agent will be able to refer you to one . This type of advanced planning may not be justified in ordinary circumstances . However if there is a good possibility that there could be claims by creditors of either the insured or the beneficiary , then the use of appropriate trusts should be considered .
Life insurance must be distributed to a beneficiary and not the estate to remain exempt from the deceaseds creditors . The beneficiaries creditors would be able to go after the life insurance proceeds . Most retirement accounts and cash value within a life insurance policy are exempt from creditors and can be retained , even through bankruptcy . One way creditors sometimes get to the funds is if life insurance proceeds are deposited into what was a joint checking account that the creditor had access to . While a person may be able to have the funds returned through legal proceedings , it is often best to close the joint account and open a new account .
Yes possibly . Indiana has an inheritance tax that life insurance can be included in . Spouses are exempt , but most other kin and non-related persons to the insured could incur the inheritance tax . In Indiana the tax ranges from 1 to 20 % and is due 9 months after death .
Brandon is right . That is way too broad of a question to answer specifically . But there are studies that are done every year comparing auto insurance premiums from state to state . In the 2014 study , Indiana ranked # 12 in the country for having the lowest auto insurance premium . Compared to most states , Indiana does n't have that many coverage requirements as other states do .
There are assets protected from creditors by federal and/or state statute . Those assets are considered essential for the debtor to maintain at least a financial well-being . Creditor protection is balanced by the concerns for creditor 's rights to access the debtor 's assets . Annuities can be argued as a legitimate retirement plan like IRAs . Some states exempt annuities from the claims of creditors . Each state has differing views and regulations on the claims of creditors . Seek out legal counsel to determine what assets are protected from claims of creditors .
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Indiana , thanks to the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare . What reduces rates -LRB- often dramatically -RRB- , is the federal subsidy that is based on your household income . Often , this can generate financial help of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 per year . And this money is automatically deducted from the premium . Anthem typically offers the the lowest rates , although Humana is competitive in many areas . Both individual and family plans are available along with coverage for small businesses . If household income is too high to qualify for a subsidy , off-Exchange plans can be purchased from the participating major carriers . Where do you get the best rates ? Typically , an experienced broker website will offer the lowest prices along with expert advice . There are never fees or charges for utilizing this type of assistance . I should know since I 'm an Indiana health insurance broker and have been in the business for 33 years . But it does n't seem that long !
Life insurance is not charged income tax in Indiana or any other state , as long as the beneficiary is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , the proceeds will be subject to income tax . Also , interest paid on the face amount for cash value policies can be taxed . Federal and state estate taxes also are charged on the excess over the exempt amount .
Life insurance proceeds are usually protected from creditors in New York if the beneficiary of the policy is a person or other entity besides the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , then the life insurance proceeds are subject to probate and creditors will try to get the debt repaid at that time . However , creditors can not go after life insurance left to a beneficiary unless that beneficiary also shared in the debt .
Low cost health insurance in Indiana is available and can be purchased from an experienced broker -LRB- with the help of their website -RRB- . Anthem and UnitedHealthcare are two of the biggest carriers in the state . They offer a wide variety of single , family and business healthcare plans . As a broker for more than 32 years , our job is to determine which plan best matches the needs you have and the budget you have to work with . The Indian Health Insurance Exchange has an Open Enrollment that offers four types of plans with financial subsidies . Do you qualify for subsidies ? Which plan is the most economical ? Will your pre-existing conditions be covered ? These are some of the topics that our websites offer along with free online quoting and comparison of plans . Indiana has many affordable options .
Comparing health insurance quotes in Indiana is very simple and you 'll be able to view the best prices from the top-rated companies . Typically , utilizing an experienced broker 's website will yield you the best rates . As an experienced broker myself , with a premier trusted website , we utilize modern software and are able to research and find the best offers . The Indiana Health Insurance Exchange allows you to apply for many affordable plans through Anthem and a few other carriers . No medical questions need to be answered and during Open Enrollment , your acceptance is virtually guaranteed . The new Marketplace will also provide a federal tax subsidy of your income is under 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level .
We should be careful to define terminology . Life insurance proceeds , meaning death benefit would always be creditor protected as life insurance bypasses the estate and is paid directly to the beneficiary . So if the deceased has creditors , they can not lay claim to life insurance proceeds . Unless that creditor is the Federal Government for Estate Tax Purposes . Life insurance is included in the estate for estate tax purposes . If the beneficiary has creditors and receives the life insurance proceeds , those proceeds would be subject to creditor claims .
With more than 33 years of experience as a broker -LRB- and fully licensed in Indiana -RRB- , I 'll answer your question . That depends . I know ... That 's not a specific answer . But there are many variables that impact the rate ... such as your age , where in Indiana you live , the type of coverage etc. . . A federal subsidy may also drastically reduce your rate . Many of my Hoosier clients are quite surprised when notified of the magnitude of the discount .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance proceeds can be taken by creditors if the proceeds go into the estate of the deceased insured person . This happens if the beneficiary of the policy is named `` the estate '' or if the persons listed as beneficiaries are no longer alive . If the beneficiary is a living person , the creditors for the deceased can not go after the insurance proceeds from the beneficiary . If it is the beneficiary who owes debt , creditors may try to access the life insurance money that the beneficiary was left .
Life insurance that is left to a person as beneficiary is usually exempt from creditors in South Carolina . If the beneficiary has co-signed for an unpaid debt at the time the Insured dies , then the creditors may be able to go after the insurance proceeds . And if the beneficiary is the Insured 's estate , creditors will try to collect their due from the insurance proceeds in the estate . But a person who receives a life insurance death benefit is not liable for the debts of the Insured .
Creditors can not reach life insurance proceeds to pay off the debts of the deceased insured person unless the beneficiary of the policy was not a person . I.e. . If the insured named his/her `` estate '' as the beneficiary , then the policy proceeds go through probate , giving creditors for the deceased , access to those funds . If the beneficiary is a person , the life insurance proceeds do not usually go through probate , but directly to that person . Creditors can not reach the money that went to the beneficiary unless the beneficiary shared the debt with the deceased .
A debtor can collect on the proceeds of a life insurance policy if that party is the beneficiary of a policy . It can depend on what state you reside in as to whether your life insurance proceeds can be exempt , if you are beneficiary because of statues you should not have any problems . The Creditor would have to know also that the policy existed to be able to pursue the debt in this manner . There are state and federal statues regarding creditors rights in insurance . Insurance was developed to protect against contingencies that might financially interfere with the proceeds that were set up for someones loved ones .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Penalty For Driving Without Car Insurance In Kentucky ?
The penalty is $ 500 or more plus court costs for a first-time offence . Court costs are often between $ 150 and $ 200 dollars . In addition to the fines for driving without insurance , the state of Kentucky can cancel your car registration if you do not have insurance . Insurance companies provide a list of insured drivers to the state . If the state does not receive notification that you have insurance for 60 days , they will send a notice to provide evidence of coverage . If you do not provide evidence of coverage within 30 days , your auto registration may be canceled .
The penalty is $ 500 or more plus court costs for a first-time offence . Court costs are often between $ 150 and $ 200 dollars . In addition to the fines for driving without insurance , the state of Kentucky can cancel your car registration if you do not have insurance . Insurance companies provide a list of insured drivers to the state . If the state does not receive notification that you have insurance for 60 days , they will send a notice to provide evidence of coverage . If you do not provide evidence of coverage within 30 days , your auto registration may be canceled .
In addition to the other information , it 's important to know that if the policy was replacing other coverage when it was issued , some states do not allow a new contestability period beyond what the replaced policy had . Kentucky for example would not allow a company to not pay a claim if someone committed sucide a week after buying the policy IF it replaced an existing policy that had been in force for over two years . The new policy is non-contestable from the first day up to the face amount of the old policy . It 's very important in Kentucky to make sure you receive a copy of the replacement form and keep it with your new policy . Most states do not have this added protection but if your does , it can make a huge difference with your insurance claim .
Kentucky does not charge income tax on life insurance benefits if they are left to a person , rather than the estate . If life insurance goes through probate , it will be taxed . Life insurance benefits are charged Kentucky inheritance taxes , with varying degrees of exemptions given to different types of heirs . They are also subject to federal estate taxes if of a sufficient amount , and in the estate of the last remaining spouse .
Life insurance proceeds that are left to a beneficiary are exempt from creditors in Kentucky , as long as the beneficiary is not a co-signer to the insured person 's debt . If the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is the estate , creditors can go after life insurance proceeds upon the insured person 's death .
When states try to be unusually restrictive they often penalize the insurance consumers in that state . For example , a few states do n't allow different rates based on gender . When that happens , most life insurance companies simply charge females the male rates . It penalizes the females around 20 % compared to what they pay in other states . New York 's restrictive requirement on insurance companies raises a lot of money for the state but greatly limits the consumer choices to just a few . Many products are not available to them that they could buy if they moved to any other state . Kentucky 's law about no new contestable period on replacement policies does protect consumers but it also causes some companies to choose not to offer products in that state . State insurance laws can be a double edged sword .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
This is a Good Question . Typically if your card is not automatically sent to you 3 months before your 65th birthday , you can apply online at the social security or Medicare site , you can also go to your local social security office . If you are working still , you may be able to defer part B . If you are in the Illinois , Kentucky , Arizona , Florida , Hawaii , Michigan , Montana , New Mexico or Wyoming , you can contact me ; otherwise contact a broker in your area to help you with all your options .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Driving a car without insurance depends on your jurisdiction . In Maryland any owned and registered vehicle must be insured . The penalties for owning and registering a vehicle without insurance is $ 150 for the first 30 days and $ 7 per day there after for as long you remain uninsured . This penalty will follow you even if you move to another state . Any tax refund will be intercepted to pay the penalty
WellPoint Health Networks , Inc. merged with Anthem where the name WellPoint , Inc. was adopted . WellPoint is an independent company of the BCBS Association . WellPoint is nowthe largest managed health care company in the Blue Cross and Blue Shield family association serving California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indian , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia , Washington D.C. , and Wisconsin . It operates under other names in the mentioned states as Blue Cross , Anthem and UniCare .
You can transfer the title of a car to someone else . However , the new owners will have to obtain car insurance on the vehicle if they wish to drive it . Driving without insurance could result on severe penalties and possibly a license suspension . If that occurs , it could take years before it no longer appears on your driving record .
Driving without car insurance can have both legal and financial impacts upon your life . Caveat , this is geared towards Michigan drivers . Financially : if you get into a collision and are negligent , you could be sued for physical damages to the other driver/passengers . Without insurance you will be on the hook for the entire judgment against you . Furthermore , if you are driving a new car you will either be out the money you spent on the car , or you will owe the leasing company or lender the value of the car . Legal : in Michigan driving without proof of no-fault insurance can result in a $ 500 ticket and three points on your license . So you will be out $ 500 immediately , and a huge increase in your insurance upon renewal . This is assuming you will still have the same insurance and not get a non-renewal notice . I hope this helps .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
DO N'T drive a new car home without insurance ! Always make sure you have active insurance before driving your car , especially a new car . If you lease or get a loan on a car the finance department usually will not let your drive off of the lot without proof of insurance . It depends on the state , but to my knowledge most states allow at least two weeks from the purchase of a new car for you to call your agent or carrier and update your vehicle information . During those two weeks the new vehicle -LRB- or newly purchased used vehicle -RRB- is typically considered covered . However , always update your vehicles with your agent or carrier asap !
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , the answer is not so great . The likelihood of you driving the car without a license if you know it 's insured is pretty high , and that is not a good thing for any insurer . The penalties for getting caught driving without a license are a whole lot worse , when they find you are uninsured also . The companies are all about risk , and no reputable company will take on that one . Get your license , then the insurance . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
How Does Cancer Insurance Work ?
Cancer insurance is used to help pay for non-covered and out of pocket items under your major medical plan . These things will include your deductibles and copay , as well as some treatment disallowed under major medical . Some cancer plans are reimbursement policies while others pay a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis .
While trying to purchase a life insurance policy with a history of cancer can prove challenging , even if the cancer has been effectively treated and eliminated , it is possible in fact possible to get term life insurance with a cancer history . The rates for a life insurance policy is determined by the risk classification you qualify for . For example , a person who qualifies for a standard risk class would be viewed as having a normal life expectancy , while someone who only qualifies for a substandard rate -LRB- also known as a table rating and designated with letters A-J or 1-10 -RRB- is considered to have a shorter than normal life expectancy . Since the life expectancy would be considered shorter for someone with a history of cancer , a table rating may be assigned and a higher premium charged . Every life insurance company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may respond with a more favorable risk class offer than others even though they 're based on the same exact medical profile . There are several key items that insurance companies will look at to determine the risk classification assigned for your policy . Some of those items include : 1 -RRB- Type of cancer - colon cancer , breast cancer , lung cancer , prostate cancer , melanoma , ovarian cancer , skin cancer , or other internal cancers . 2 -RRB- Stage of cancer - Stage 0 , Stage 1 , Stage 2 , Stage 3 , or Stage 4 . Stage 0 is carcinoma in situ and means the cancer likely has not spread to other organs . Stages 1 , 2 , and 3 indicate more extensive disease with larger tumors or spreading . In Stage 4 , the cancer has spread to other organs and life expectancy is usually very short . 3 -RRB- If there was melanoma only , the `` Clark Level '' would be considered the same way the above stages are . 4 -RRB- Course of treatment how was the cancer treated ? Did you go through chemotherapy or radiation ? Surgery only ? Immunotherapy ? Bone marrow transplant ? something else ? 5 -RRB- How long since the treatment was completed/last date of treatment ? - cancer that was found and treated 5 or more years ago will be seen more favorably than cancer diagnosed only 1-2 years ago . The longer it 's been since the cancer was treated/eliminated/went into remission , the less likely it is considered to come back . 6 -RRB- Have you been treated/are being treated for any other health conditions such as heart disease , diabetes , high blood pressure , high cholesterol , abnormal lab test results , etc. . The best way to obtain term life insurance with medical history including cancer is with the help of an independent life insurance agent that represents many of the top insurance companies . They will be able to shop your full medical history for the best possible offer before applying for a policy . That way , you know what the most likely outcome will be before ever starting the process of filling out formal paperwork and taking an exam . Not only that , but there are no charges or fees for using the help of an agent -LRB- agents are paid by the insurance companies -RRB- . The insurance cost is exactly the same as if purchasing directly from the company . By law , the insurance company can not charge you less for applying directly . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including shopping the case , providing quotes , and comparing options , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
There is one type of life insurance that you can get while having any type of cancer , and that is called Guaranteed Life Insurance . It is not available at every age , and it is graded for 2 or more years . But it does not have any health requirements . You can also purchase pre-need policies at a funeral home while having cancer . With those , the graded period is usually one year . If your cancer was caught in the early stages and has a good prognosis , you should be able to get a policy other than guaranteed issue about a year or two after the last treatment . Some types of policies will add a flat extra that drops off after a few years . Others add table ratings to the policy . It all depends on the type of cancer , the stage , how well it responded to treatment , how long ago you were diagnosed and last treated , and whether your cancer recurred or not . Finding life insurance for persons with cancer can be complicated . Contacting an impaired risk life insurance specialist is helpful to find your best rate .
What does AFLAC ' c Cancer policy pay ? I can only give you a general idea as each policy pays out different amounts , depending on the level of coverage you purchase . With that said , AFLACs Cancer policies usually pay for : Cancer tests such as Mammographies cervical screening colonoscopies , daily hospital benefit for room and board , some cancer drugs , cancer surgical benefits , anesthesiologist , daily doctor visits while you are in the hospital , blood , plasma , radiation therapy , chemotherapy , reconstruction after surgery , daily visits to the hospital by the patients doctor , benefits for travel to a cancer center including hotel , airfare , gas for your car to get there , ambulance benefits . These are some of the main coverages , but remember that there either annual or lifetime limits as to how much AFLAC will pay , it all depends on your policy .
Cancer insurance is very important , Cancer is anepidemic . half of al men and a three of all women will get some form of cancer in their life time . The good news is that thanks to advances inmodernmedicine , many people aresurviving then every before . The bad news , Cancer oftens bankrupts survivors . Remembermajor medical plans or Medicare covers most but not all of your cancer treatment . But you will have significant out of pocket expenses from deductibles and coinsurance which can be paid by a good cancer plan . . More importantly to consider is the lost of income due to the sickness , Cancer treatments likechemotherapy , cancermedication and thediseaseit 's self takes a great toll on the body , leaving suffers unable to work or forcing them to reduce their workschedulesto take care of themselves and recover.You medical insurance will not provide you with money to pay your personal expenseslikemortgage , food orutilities supplemental cancer plans that pay cash to their policy holders like Afalc , give you money to cover these expenses .
Most people can get life insurance after having skin cancer . If basal cell carcinoma , the rates usually are what they would be if the person never had skin cancer . If squamous cell carcinoma , it depends on the stage of the cancer , how it was treated , and for how long the person has been skin cancer free . A standard to low table rating is common . A diagnosis of melanoma will require that the cancer was a low stage , was successfully removed without recurring , and that a certain amount of time has passed since the last treatment , in order to get a medically underwritten policy . It may have a flat extra during the first few years of the policy . If that is not available , persons with past melanoma can usually get simplified issue coverage , and can definitely get a guaranteed issue policy if they qualify age-wise .
Critical illness insurance pays for thyroid cancer if the cancer is serious . E.g. Critical illness insurance does not pay for cancer that is in situ , but will pay if the cancer is in a more advanced stage . That being said , you need to consult the policy to see their guidelines for thyroid cancer . It may have be to a certain size to be covered . But thyroid cancer is covered in many situations .
If you have purchased the life insurance prior to being diagnosed with breast cancer , yes you are covered . If you have had breast cancer and looking to purchase life insurance there are some things you need to know . The type , amount and terms depends on the cancer itselfand how long you have been cancer free after your last treatment . To get into the standard ratings after breast cancer practically all carriers will want to see you cancer free for 10 years . Anything less than10 yearswill be a higher risk policy of either rated premiums or graduated benefits . Good luck .
Yes , you can get life insurance after breast cancer , but you 're going to want to shop the case among multiple carriers . Running a `` free quote '' on a website is not going to provide you with much useful information . With a medical history of breast cancer , the risk class carriers will offer is going to vary quite a bit between them . You 're generally going to be looking at a substandard table-rating for coverage and most free quotes only provide rates for up to standard risk classes . The type of cancer , stage of cancer , course of treatment , is treatment completed , how long since the last date of treatment , and any other medical conditions are some of the factors that will go into the underwriting evaluation by each carrier . In general , most carriers will want to wait at least 2-5 years from the date treatment is completed for most cancer histories before they will consider offering any coverage -LRB- varies by carrier and type of cancer -RRB- . Guaranteed-issue whole life policies -LRB- GIWL -RRB- are available as they do not ask health questions and there is no exam . However , these are `` graded '' policies and generally feature a 2-3 year waiting -LRB- graded -RRB- period before providing full coverage -LRB- payment of proceeds when death of the insured occurs by illness or injury -RRB- - if the insured dies under accidental means during the graded period , the policy will still pay the full death benefit . GIWL policies generally feature a maximum face amount of $ 25,000 under a single policy . With this type of medical history , you do NOT want to just go and apply to multiple companies at the same time - this can work against you . I highly , highly recommend consulting with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can shop the case for you .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have cancer ? Well , it depends upon a lot of questions . The type of cancer diagnosed , the date first diagnosis occurred . I need to know was it treated by surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , hormonal therapy . I 'll also need to know , enlist the stage of the cancer , as well as the grade of the cancer . I need to know also , has it spread to other parts of the body , because that 's going to be issue for us to be able to underwrite . And then the last one is has there been proper follow ups to your cancer ? Which is CT scans , X-rays , bone scans , laboratory work . I need to know those kinds of things to accumulate enough information to give you the proper offer . Remember , certain carriers are more benevolent in certain types of cancers than others .
Traditionally , you can get up to 20-30x your income level of life insurance . The medical history does not necessarily limit how much you can get . The medical history determines the risk classification which controls the premiums for the coverage you want to put in place . When it comes to breast cancer , the details of the medical condition will determine which carriers will offer coverage and what the risk classification would be -LRB- each carrier has different underwriting , you may not get the same risk class offer from each of them -RRB- , The best thing to do is to shop the case via an independent insurance agent/broker who can shop it to multiple companies . You do NOT want to apply to multiple companies as this can work against you due to the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- - from a company 's point of view , it 's sort of like a red flag if you will if they saw you applied to multiple companies which they can check the MIB for . In order to secure the most accurate quotes for the coverage , a number of factors would need to be known such as when the cancer was diagnosed , what stage is it in/was it in , how was it treated , has treatment been completed , are there anymore tests scheduled or that need to be completed , are you being treated for any other conditions , what prescriptions do you take , family medical history , and other factors . If you have a copy of the pathology report , that will help with a lot of the input . If cancer is current , guaranteed-issue whole life -LRB- GIWL -RRB- will be the only type of coverage available as it does n't have any medical questions or exam requirements . However , the amount of coverage available under a single policy is $ 20,000 - $ 25,000 , depending on the carrier . To get more than that , you would need to stack multiple policies . Under GIWL policies , they traditionally feature a 2 or 3 year graded period - meaning you only have accidental death coverage during those periods , otherwise the carrier just returns the premiums paid into the policy if death occurs during the graded period . After the graded period expires , the full benefit is payable . Carriers typically only issue fully-underwritten coverage if the cancer has been in remission/treatment completed for at least 2 years . Many carriers prefer 5 + years from the date treatment was completed for a more favorable risk class . Send me a message via the `` contact me '' button by my profile picture if you would like me to assist with your coverage . My group is licensed with about 50 different carriers in numerous states . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know how I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Life insurance does cover death by cancer . However , it is common for someone diagnosed with cancer to seek out a life insurance policy , and at that point in time it is very difficult to obtain coverage . It generally takes at least a couple of years to obtain a medically underwritten policy after a cancer diagnosis , especially if over stage 2 . Of course , it also depends on the type of cancer , treatment needed , and effectiveness of the treatment . If a policy is issued , it generally is graded for 1-3 years , so that only a small amount is paid out if death occurs during that time . If the policyholder outlives the graded period . the policy pays the full face amount . As with every health condition , it is best to get your life insurance before a serious diagnosis . But whereas some health conditions cause your rates to go up more the longer you have it , the good news with cancer is that the longer you are in remission , the lower your rates usually go . So get what you can , and then keep trying every few years to get something lower priced . You will find that there are life insurance agents rooting for you , and who will work hard to help you get the best rate possible .
Yes , if someone has a life insurance policy and later passes away from cancer , the life insurance policy will pay the death benefit . The only exception would be if the applicant knew they had cancer but did not disclose it at the time the application was filled out , and if death occurred within the first two years . If the policy was guaranteed issue and the application did not ask about cancer , then not disclosing it will not matter . If someone is diagnosed with cancer and then applies for life insurance , the type of policy that can be obtained will be dependent on the type , stage and treatment of the cancer , and when the cancer was diagnosed and last treated . Life insurance almost never carries exclusions for cancer , but a graded policy can exclude paying the full death benefit for all but accidental death during the first 1-3 years of the policy .
A lot of people think `` once you have cancer , you 're uninsurable for life . '' This is not true . If you 've completed your cancer treatment and a given amount of time has passed since it 's completion -LRB- generally 2 + years are ideal conditions for getting coverage approved by an underwriter . Some carriers may ask for 3 , 4 , 5 , or more years since completion , varies by carrier -RRB- , you can qualify for life insurance benefits . When you 're looking for life insurance and you have a history of cancer , you will definitely want to shop the case before applying for coverage with a company . Every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . With cancer histories , the type of cancer , course of treatment , when treatment was completed , and other factors , may result in a wide variety of risk classes carriers will assign . Company ABC could come back with table 2 and Company XYZ could come back with table 6 . You will want to work with an independent agent/broker that can look at multiple carriers , not just a single one . The only point in time where a carrier is going to look at cancer as an auto-decline , is when treatment is n't yet completed . During this time , you 're best options for life insurance benefits will generally be a guaranteed-issue whole life policy -LRB- features a 2 year `` graded '' benefit period -RRB- .
While in the midst of cancer treatments , the only type of Life Insurance one can get is Guaranteed Issue . Since there are age limits on guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- minimum age is usually 45 +0 -RRB- , and since it is not available in every state , not everyone can get coverage while having cancer that is not yet removed , cured , or in remission . After a year or two of being cancer free , there are several simplified issue policies that are available in addition to guaranteed issue , and some of these will work for persons under age 45 . The farther out from the time of being last treated for cancer , the better the chances of getting a regular life insurance policy . The type and stage of cancer also enter in . To find out whether you can get life insurance as a cancer patient or survivor , call an agent who can walk through the questions with you and who has an arsenal of policies to choose from . Get one locked in now , and hopefully you can find a cheaper one in the future .
I believe so , as I both own one , and sell them to my clients . They can help make up the deductables and co-pays that are not paid by the health insurance companies . They can also bring in extra income when the insured or family member is not working due to treatments . Remember that these payments from a cancer policy are paid directly to the insured or beneficiary , not the doctors or hopitals . The statistics say that 1 out of 2 men and 1 out of 3 women will contract some form of cancer in their lifetime , the odds are unfortunately good that you will also . Most cancer policys ' also have a wellness provision that will reimburse the insured if they have a mammogram or a pap test or other cancer related tests done , even if they have health insurance coverage . One company , Allstate Benefits , expanded their cancer wellness program to cover blood tests for cholesteral , chest xrays , EKG 's and other non cancer related tests . generally these reimbursements have maximum amounts that they will pay on an annual basis .
The short answer is yes , you can buy life insurance after cancer . The type , amount and terms depends on the cancer itselfand how long you have been cancer free after your last treatment . To get into the standard ratings after breast cancer practically all carriers will want to see you cancer free for 10 years . Anything less than10 yearswill be a higher risk policy of either rated premiums or graduated benefits .
There are three ways to answer this question . 1 -RRB- If applying for a new policy while having cancer , it is difficult to find a Term policy that will cover the cancer patient until cancer treatments have ended for at least a year . There are a few policies with graded benefits that will do so . The possibility of getting traditional Term life insurance grows as the time grows that the cancer is in remission . 2 -RRB- If applying for a Term policy with no history or signs or cancer , and just wondering if the policy would cover cancer in the future , yes , it would . 3 -RRB- If owning an existing Term life insurance policy and then being diagnosed with cancer , the policy will cover it .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Is Individual Health Insurance ?
How much a specific individual should be paying for health insurance is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Individual health insurance costs less than it ever did . As an experienced health insurance broker with 33 years of experience with a top-rated website , I 'll answer your question quickly and accurately . The cost of coverage depends on many factors , including your age , income -LRB- for the subsidy -RRB- , zip code , and type of policy . Shopping the correct way will save consumers time , money and frustration . That 's our job and saving customers money is the end result .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
With the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- that became effective January 1 , 2014 , the differences in what group and individual health insurance cover are virtually nonexistent . The removal of underwriting , pre-existing condition exclusions and/or limitations and the addition of guaranteed issue and maternity coverage to both policy types has furthered leveled the playing field between group health and individual health insurance products . The crucial advantage group health plans continue to enjoy versus their individual market counterparts are tax issue related . What an employer contributes towards the health insurance coverage of their employees is a deductible business expense and in some small group cases may even qualify for a tax credit . In addition , employees can pay for their share of group health premiums using pre-tax dollars under a Section 125 Plan . Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions not only saves employee 's money , it reduces net taxable payroll which in turn lowers employer FICA matching expenses which is a further tax savings . For most individuals who purchase and pay for individual health insurance on their own there are none of these associated tax benefits . That is not to say that some individuals can not structure their business affairs to get some tax advantages in the individual marketplace but , after the ACA , our system is now set up to continue to tax favor group policies versus individual policies and to tax favor individual health insurance policies via subsidies up to certain income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- .
Why are you being forced to buy health insurance ? Well , long story short , the Federal Government decided at this point in time that health insurance is no longer a state 's right to decide and have taken over oversight of health care . Prior to this federal act , states were left to decide how much or how little health insurance an individual had to buy . Some states -LRB- Haiwaii -RRB- have a sort of single payor . others allow much more choice in health plans including the choice not to purchase . While I would not consider going without insurance , I do agree it should be up to the individual to decide .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
Some agents may say that 5 % -LRB- or maybe 7 % and even up to 10 % -RRB- of your annual earnings should be allocated toward life insurance premiums . This is dependent on individual circumstances and one of the first things you need to identify when looking for individual life insurance . In figuring out your life insurance needs , you should determine how much life insurance death benefit your beneficiaries will require . Then shop and compare quotes to get an idea of how much that amount life insurance coverage will be . Budgeting and planning for how much you want to allocate toward life insurance is important . To manage your life insurance policies efficiently reassess your need for life insurance every two to three years .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
In 2014 and beyond , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , individual & fully insured small to medium sized group health insurance plans will have to fall within four categories referred to as Bronze , Silver , Gold and Platinum . These categories represent an actuarial valuation of how much financial exposure the policyholder has up to a maximum out-of-pocket financial exposure of $ 6350 . It is a gross over simplification but for the average health insurance consumer , the closest I can come to explaining these `` Metallic '' plan categories is that Bronze represents 60 % coverage , Silver equals 70 % coverage , Gold equals 80 % coverage and Platinum equals 90 % coverage . All of these plans , by law , must be guaranteed to be issued by the insurance carrier , can not be subject to underwriting and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately with no lifetime limits on coverage . In addition , all plans must cover what are referred to as the Minimum Essential Benefits . These requirements range from covering a wide range of preventive care services at 100 % , coverage for maternity , mental health & substance abuse along with a variety of other services including pediatric dental & vision to even educating women on how to nurse their babies -LRB- how the human race survived for thousands of yearswithout the government providing for such training is a mystery to me -RRB- . Unfortunately , there really are no simple andconcise ways to explain health insurance plans . Different state regulations also apply and each insurance carrier can design health insurance plans that fall within these four different `` Metallic '' categories that can vary widely in their appearance . To make an informed choice for your health insurance as an individual or a business it is more important than ever that you seek out the advice of an experienced health insurance broker/consultant who understands the intricacies of the health insurance plans options and their associated costs that are available to you in your specific area .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
You 've touched on one of the inequities of our system , the essentially unequal tax treatment of individual versus group health insurance . Group health insurance plans are tax advantaged in two ways ; 1 -RRB- what the employer pays towards coverage is a deductible business expense , and 2 -RRB- the employee 's share of their insurance premium costs can be deducted from their paychecks on a pretax basis and reducing their net cost of buying health insurance . Neither of these tax advantages apply to individual health insurance coverage a person might purchase for themselves . Though , as of January 1 , 2014 , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , person 's purchasing individual health insurance through the government marketplaces may qualify for an advanced premium tax subsidy depending upon their income level . So , in simple terms , in the group health insurance world you may be able to pay for your portion of your health insurance on a pre-tax basis but in the individual health insurance world you are generally in a post-tax payment environment -LRB- I 'm not going to stray into how some small business owners structure their business expenses and taxes as it regards these matters -RRB- .
How much disability insurance do you need ? Well , the answer will vary depending on the individual and what they have asset and investment wise and how willing they are to liquidate those assets . As far as how much or how long or how soon is a function of looking at your situation and finding something that works for you .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Should Renters Insurance Include ?
Renters insurance includes contents coverage in stated amounts , personal liability coverage in stated amounts , loss of use coverage in stated amounts and medical payments for accidents inside the covered dwelling in stated amounts . Renters insurance is basically coverage for everything but the dwelling which the building owner or apartment owner is responsible for . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
I am not quite sure what your asking , so I will answer this question , which is what I think you asked : `` What are the standard coverages included in a renters policy ? '' The standard coverage in a renters policy includes personal property , liability and medical payments . Personal property can be general property and scheduled property -LRB- i.e. jewelry , cameras , hearing aids -RRB- on premise ; and , sometimes , there can be a sub-limit for personal property off-premise . Liability covers your negligent acts against a third party . Medical payments provides a small sum of money to people who hurt themselves at your rented premise . I hope this answers what you were asking .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
If it is included in your renters contract , renters insurance can be required . This is actually a very smart thing , both for the renter and for the landlord . The renters insurance will protect your property in case of fire or theft , and it helps protect the landlord in case of a liability claim . Also , landlord insurance is generally cheaper if renters insurance is required .
You will find renters insurance to be very inexpensive . With most companies renter insurance covering approximately $ 5,000 to $ 10,000 in personal contents and $ 300,000 in personal liability to be approximately $ 150 to $ 300 dollars a year which is equivalent to about $ 12.50 to $ 25 dollars a month . Depending on the carrier this could vary . By writing a renters policy not only are you getting coverage for your personal belongings but you are also getting personal liability coverage . Some companies also include additional coverage such as host liquor liability , which you would need to rent halls for events like a wedding or a birthday . You may also be able to schedule things such as your cell phone which may or may not be cheaper then purchasing the coverage from your cell phone carrier . You will find that if you purchase your renters policy through the same carrier as your auto insurance that the discount you receive on your auto insurance will more than pay for your renters policy . Multi-policy discounts with some companies can range from 5 % -20 % or possibly more , which can save you hundreds on your auto insurance . So be sure to talk to your insurance agent about writing a renters policy and what discounts are available .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is The Federal Employee Retirement Plan ?
The is the federal employees retirement system for federal government employees . Most of these plans are defined benefit retirement plans , but some offer defined contribution plans , which are becoming more popular . Federal pensions are under current scrutiny .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Unfortunately there is no simple answer to your question . Federal employees have a wide variety of health insurance plan options made available to them at every Federal open enrollment season and these options vary depending upon the employee 's geographic location . My spouse is a Federal employee so I get stuck with reviewing the options for our family every year . As every person 's health care situation is unique , their financial resources vary and you may have a choice ranging from HMO 's to high deductible Health Savings Account based plans there simply is no one size fits all answer . If you have a strong preference for certain doctors , hospitals and pharmacies then determining which plan options have these providers in-network will be a good starting point . Next you will want to examine the cost sharing arrangements in the plans that have the providers you like . This is where looking into the plan 's deductible , co-insurance and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure plus any doctor and prescription copayment features comes into play . And , last but certainly not least , will be whatthe monthly premiums are for the finalist plans that have met all your other criteria . I wish I could make life simpler for you and just say choose Plan X but the Federal Government has gone to great lengths to provide its employees lots of plans to choose from at different price points so it really defies any simple answer . Kind of like if you asked me what car would be best for you and I said a Prius only to find out you need to tow a 24-foot boat to the lake every weekend - the Prius would get you good gas mileage but might not even pull that boat out of the driveway .
Up until recently , federal employees were not offered short term disability or long term disability insurance . If a federal employee was disabled for over a year and met the length of employment guidelines , they could take advantage of a disability retirement program . However , federal employees are now offered a choice of disability plans through FedAdvantage to fill in the gaps in their federal benefits .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- Plan EmployerInformation - What is a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan ? Its a great benefit to both your employees and you!A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-deferred plan that can be set up forany public school , university , college or non-profit 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organization . Generally , any employee may participate as away to invest for retirement . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan benefits more than just your employeesIt benefits your organization . Help reward and retain loyal employees while attractingnew , well-qualified ones . Maintain a positive work environment and enhance yourreputation as a progressive , caring organization , with littlecost to you . It benefits you in your goal to prepare for yourown retirement . You will have a high-quality plan to build a supplementaryretirement income while saving on taxes today . You have the ability to choose from a wide variety ofinvestment options to fit your goals . How does a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan work ? Contributions - You and your employees can contribute money on a pre-taxbasis . This means you can afford to contribute more than ifyou put money aside after taxes were deducted . And , unlike ataxable investment , earnings on the account compound taxfree until the money is withdrawn . Then both contributionsand earnings will be treated as taxable income . A pre-taxcontribution of up to $ 17,500 may be made in 2013 . Forthose 50 and older , a catch-up contribution of $ 5,500 maybe made . Additional catch-up contributions may be madeby those with at least 15 years of service with a qualifiedemployer . These limits may increase in future years.You may be able to contribute to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan as well , and double your contributions . For example , in2013 , the maximum contribution to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan is normally $ 17,500 . That can be combined with the403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan normal contribution limit of $ 17,500 for a totalof $ 35,000 invested tax deferred . Catch-up contributions canincrease this combined limit even more . Employer match You may choose to have a plan available for just youremployees to easily contribute money for their retirement.Or , you can go a step further and offer additionalcontributions where you match all or a part of employeecontributions . The plan does not require an employer match , but its a great way to encourage participation and is apowerful tool in attracting and retaining employees . If youchoose to make matching contributions , they do not counttoward the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan limits on employee contributions . Roth option - You may choose to offer a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- option . Under aRoth option , employee contributions are made on an aftertax basis . However , a distribution from a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSAaccount is completely free of federal income tax if it meetsboth of the following requirements : It is made after the end of the five year period that beginswith the year that the employee made his or her first Roth403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSA contribution to your plan . It is made after the employee reaches age 59 , becomesdisabled or dies . Access to account balances-You can select a time period for employees to become fullyvested in the employer-matching portion of the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan.Note that employee contributions are always 100 % vested.Distributions can be made only when participants severemployment , reach age 59 , become permanently disabledor experience financial hardship , or are a reservist called toactive duty for 180 days or more or for an indefinite period.The employer plan may impose additional restrictions . Unless the distributions are rolled over to an eligibleretirement plan , they will be taxed as ordinary income.Distributions before age 59 may also be subject to an IRS10 % penalty tax . Distributions attributable to employercontributions are only allowed on severance of employmentor occurrence of another event as provided by the plan .
The is the federal employees retirement system , the FERS , for federal government employees . Most of these retirement plans are defined benefit retirement plans , but some offer defined contribution plans , which are becoming more popular like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- in the private sector .
Federal Disability Insurance may be a reference to Federal Employee Disability Insurance . If so , it is private disability coverage that can be purchased by federal employees to supplement the federally provided plans , FERS and CSRS . Or Federal Disability Insurance may be referring to Social Security Disability benefits paid to qualified disabled persons by the federal government .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
All group retirement plans that are covered by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act ERISA are based on some formulaic process . This formulaic process is used to ensure against discrimination in the plan . Federal law defines discrimination as a plan that too heavily favors highlight compensated employees . Highly compensated employees are employees who earn over a certain amount in annual income , as of 2013 that amount is $ 115,000 .
Yes , but not just because someone in the front office feels like picking on you that day . There would have to be some change in your eligibility status or what the company 's policy is to trigger such an event . For example , you had your working hours reduced below 30 hours per week and this puts you below both your employer 's and the Federal government 's definition of what a full-time eligible employee is -LRB- 30 or more hours per week defines a person as full-time for benefits eligibility under ObamaCare -RRB- . This could trigger your still being an employee but no longer being eligible for their group health insurance plan . If you are responsible for paying a portion of your health insurance premium -LRB- and most employees are these days -RRB- and for some reason you are unable to pay your share of the premium -LRB- usually hard to do since these payments are generally taken out on a payroll deduction basis -RRB- then you could be terminated for non-payment of premium . Of course , if your employer decides to terminate their group health insurance plan entirely and you are dropped from coverage because a group plan no longer exists at your workplace you are obviously dropped . Though usually even small employers will try to give advance notice and employers -LRB- especially larger ones -RRB- are required to give a certain amount of advance notice of a plan change or termination . But you ca n't be dropped from your employer 's coverage in an arbitrary manner while still an employee meeting all the eligibility requirements set forth under your employer 's personnel policies and state and Federal laws . For example , you could n't be terminated from the health insurance plan simply because your were running up a lot of expenses for your cancer treatment .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
There is federal life insurance offered to federal employees in a group policy , called FEGLI -LRB- Federal Employees Group Life Insurance -RRB- . There is also a mutual life insurance company called Federal Life Insurance Company -LRB- Mutual -RRB- . The company 's home office is in Riverwoods , IL , and it sells life insurance and annuities .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The Thrift Savings Plan -LRB- TSP -RRB- is a federal qualified defined contribution plan for U.S. civil service employees and uniformed service members . The Thrift Savings Plan is part of the Federal Employees Retirement System is similar to 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and Roth 401k .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
The Federal Long Term Care Insurance Program -LRB- FLTCIP -RRB- provides long term care insurance for enrollees who are federal employees , USPS employees and active and retired members of the uniformed services and their qualified relatives . It is sponsored by the US Office of Personnel Management -LRB- OPM -RRB- and was introduced in 2002 by Long Term Care Partners LLC , a joint venture of MetLife and John Hancock . Since 2009 , John Hancock is the sole sponsor of Long Term Care Partners . The FLTCIP was specially designed to meet the needs of the federal family . The features and benefits are monitored by OPM and is on its second version . Qualified applicants are underwritten in a manner similar to LTC insurance sold to individuals by John Hancock and others . Go to the website for the program to find extensive information .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Type Of Hospital Bed Will Medicare Pay For ?
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Hospital beds are considered durable medical goods and are covered under Medicare Part B . If you can prove that the hospital bed is medically necessary and you have Medicare Part B then the cost of the hospital bed will be covered under medicare .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
Medicare has specific fees for DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheel chairs , walkers and hospital beds . DME supplies are covered under Medicare Part B . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier and make sure they accept assignment . The hospital bed requires a doctors prescription . Your DME supplier can give you an idea of how much Medicare will pay toward the cost of renting a bed .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed under `` durable medical equipment '' . If you need an adjustable bed please discuss this with your doctor and alert them that you are going to purchase a bed and the company selling the bed will bill medicare so you can ask the doctor if he will certify it as being medically necessary
A Medicare swing bed is used when a patient still needs rehabilitation or skilled nursing services after a consecutive stay in an acute care hospital of at least 3 days . Medicare will pay for this stay up to 20 days in full and up to 100 days with a copay . Swing beds are located in Medicare approved small rural hospitals that offer both acute care and skilled nursing or rehabilitative care , and in Medicare approved skilled nursing facilities .
Health insurance is intended to pay for items that are medically necessary . No matter how much better a new mattress may be for any medical condition one may have , you would be hard pressed to find a physician that is going to prescribe a new bed and deem it medically necessary . And , even if you found a doctor to write such a prescription , you are going to have a very difficult time convincing an insurance company this was an true medical need , as opposed to something to help you sleep better . If you are covered by Medicare , and prescribe a hospital bed , that is covered under Medicare Part B as durable medical equipment , with you being responsible for buying 20 % of the Medicare-approved cost of a hosptial bed after your deductible has been met .
Medicare will pay for an in home hospital bed that has been ordered by a doctor and approved by Medicare . You generally have the option to rent or purchase the bed under Medicare part B . The regular deductible and 20 % copay apply , although a medical supplement plan can sometimes offset these costs .
One Medicare 72 hour rule is the rule that dictates that you must spend at least three days , or 72 hours , as an inpatient in the hospital before you can be discharged to a Medicare bed in a skilled nursing facility . This means three consecutive nights after being formally admitted as an inpatient . Inpatient status may not necessarily begin the first night spent in the hospital . Another Medicare 72 hour rule relates to billing . It states that services receives 72 hours before a hospitalization must be bundled into one bill .
Medicare Part B covers hospital beds as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- - it must be prescribed for use in your home by a doctor and the doctor is enrolled in Medicare . Medicare will generally cover 80 % of the expenses with you responsible for the other 20 % . You will want to find out if the supplier accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- - if they do not , you would be responsible for any excess charges . I highly recommend securing a Plan F or G Medicare supplement to cover any excess charges .
Most DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- is covered by Medicare Part B . As for most DME 's , you must have a medical necessity for the equipment as certified by your doctor . After you have paid your Part B deductible , Medicare will pay 80 % of the allowed amount for a hospital bed and you pay the remaining balance . You should use a Medicare approved supplier that takes assignment to lower your OOP costs .
In some situations you may qualify for special beds and or mattresses . If you are completely immobile , or have a tendency towards bed sores , Medicare Part B may authorize payment for a special bed or mattress . Best to ask your doctor for advice on this matter . Be sure to use a Medicare approved DME provider and one that accepts assignment .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not cover adult incontinence diapers and bed liners used at home because they are thrown away after each use , and not considered Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . If hospitalized or in a skilled nursing facility , Medicare will pay for incontinence diapers under Part A. Medicare will cover catheters .
Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- walkers , wheelchairs and power mobility devices , power lifts , oxygen , prosthetics , hospital bed , infusion pumps , nebulizers , CPAP devices for sleep apnea -RRB- . After the Part B deductible of $ 166 has been met Medicare will cover 80 % for durable medical equipment . If you have a Medicare Supplement it will pay the other 20 % .
Yes , Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . This includes wheelchairs , nebulizers , blood glucose monitors , hospital style beds and more . For them to cover it , you need a valid prescription from the doctor which includes your name , date of birth , address , the type of DME that you need , the duration of time you will need it for , and a diagnosis code for the condition it is treating . With that prescription , any medical supply store that is contracted with Medicare will be able to provide the equipment .
Medicare does cover Durable Medical Equipment , however , exercise equipment would most likely not be covered . DME is most often things like wheelchairs , hospital beds , oxygen equipment , nebulizers and the like . In most cases , Medicare will pay 80 % and you would be responsible for 20 % . Depending on the plan you choose , the 20 % would be covered by your Medigap policy . To find out for sure , call 1-800-MEDICARE .
Medicare Part B covers DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including hospital beds , canes , walkers and wheelchairs . To qualify your doctor must prescribe the devices and you must use a Medicare approved DME provider . Be sure to ask if they accept assignment . The nursing homes I have visited have their own wheel chairs . I am not sure why you need or want Medicare to pay for yours .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for incontinence supplies such as adult diapers and bed pads . If the insured person is in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , those items will be covered under Medicare Part A.Otherwise , Part B will not cover them due them not being classified as durable medical equipment .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does The Medicare Suffix T Mean ?
The Medicare suffix T means that the person is entitled to Medicare Part A but not to retirement and survivor 's or Railroad Retirement insurance . It also applies to those who are entitled to receive Part A for having end stage renal disease .
The Medicare suffix T means that the person is entitled to Medicare Part A but not to retirement and survivor 's or Railroad Retirement insurance . It also applies to those who are entitled to receive Part A for having end stage renal disease .
The suffixes on a Medicare number are codes that tell Medicare under whose Social Security number you are being given benefits , and your relationship to that person . It is called the Beneficiary Identification Code -LRB- BIC -RRB- . A Social Security number followed by A tells Medicare that the person filing is the retired or disabled worker who paid into the system and is drawing on his/her own Medicare benefits . B signifies the wife -LRB- over age 65 -RRB- of the primary Social Security number . To see what the entire list of suffixes visit this website : WEBSITELINK
Medicare HIC stands for your Medicare Health Insurance Claim number or code . It begins with the Social Security number of the wage earner under whose benefits the eligible person is receiving Medicare . E.g. . If you are receiving benefits as the result of yours having paid into Medicare the required period of time , the Social Security number would be yours . If you are receiving Medicare benefits under your spouse 's employment , the Social Security number would be his or hers . The suffix behind the SSN indicates your relationship to that person .
There is no part of Medicare titled Part T. Medicare consists of 4 main parts - A , B , C , and D . There are also 10 Medigap plans -LRB- a.k.a. Medicare supplement plans -RRB- - A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Are you perhaps referring to your Medicare claim number ? Your claim number is your social security number plus a letter . The letter T is one of the common ending characters to a claim number . If you have a claim number ending in `` T '' , it designates that you are either uninsured , but entitled to Part A or are fully insured and have elected to only take Part A. I hope that answers your question . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
There are issue age limits to most annuities , generally age 85 , some to age 90 . There 's an old adage : just because you can do something does n't mean you should . Annuities for age 80 and over should be scrutinized by the policy estate beneficiaries or adviser for geriatric product suitability . That does ' t mean you ca n't should n't own an annuity post age 80 , just that it must make economic sense in light of the annuitant 's life expectancy .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
To calculate the present value of deferred annuities at the time the annuity payments begin , you use the following mathematical formula . Its is C -LCB- -LSB- 1 - -LRB- 1 / -LRB- -LRB- 1 + i -RRB- ^ n -RSB- / i -RCB- . C represents the amount of the payments that will be received when the annuities are annuitized . N represents the number of payments that will be received . And i stands for the interest rate paid . To calculate the value of that annuity at present , before the payment period begins , take the number created by the formula above and insert it for the PV value in this formula : PV -LSB- 1 / -LRB- 1 + r -RRB- -RRB- ^ t -RSB- . In this formula , r is the rate of return and t is the number of time periods that are skipped before the annuity payments start . E.g. . If payments start in year 5 , t would be 4 .
Anyone who has Medicare will have noticed their Medicare number is generally their social security number with a letter added on to the end . If you see the letter `` T '' in your Medicare number , this means you have both Medicare Parts A & B , but are not yet receiving social security benefits .
Collision is a defined term in the Personal Auto Policy , so there is not a lot of debate about what collision means . According my copy of the Personal Auto Policy published by The Insurance Service Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- , Form PP 00 01 01 05 , Part D - Coverage For Damage To Your Auto , Paragraph B. . . Collision means the upset of your covered auto or a non-owned auto or their impact with another vehicle or object . Loss caused by the following is considered other than collision : 1 . Missiles or falling objects ; 2 . Fire ; 3 . Theft or larceny ; 4 . Explosion or earthquake ; 5 . Windstorm ; 6 . Hail , water or flood ; 7 . Malicious mischief or vandalism ; 8 . Riot or civil commotion ; 9 . Contact with bird or animal ; or 10 . Breakage of glass . If breakage of glass is caused by a collision , you may elect to have it considered a loss caused by collision . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
ABN stays for Advanced Benificiary Notice of Noncoverage . A doctor or Medcare provide may give you an ABN if they believe Medicare may not pay for the service you require . The ABN lists the services and items that Medicare isn ; ' t expected to pay for , an estimate of their cost and what Medicare may not pay for them . There are 3 options for you to choose from on the ABN form . 1 . You want the item or service , the provider may ask you to pay for them but you want a claim submitted to Medicare . The claim may be denied , you may be responsible to pay the provider but you can file an appeal to Medicare . Option 2 : You want the items or service but you do not want the provider to make a claim to Medicare . You may be asked to pay for the items or serivce now . Since the provider did not file a cliam to Medicare you can not file an appeal . Option 3 : You do not want the item or servce trhat may not be paid for by Medicare .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
The short answer is yes , every driver needs to be insured . Now , this does n't mean that every driver must purchase their own policy . Family members who live in the same household can usually be covered under the same policy . The reason every driver needs to be insured is that every driver has an exposure . Every time you drive a car , there is a chance that something could happen . There could be damage to a car , damage to property , or an injury to you , or to someone else . The only way you can be sure you 're protected is t be covered under an auto insurance policy . Find an agent you can trust . They 'll be able to build an auto insurance policy that protects you from most things that can happen while driving a vehicle .
The letters at the end of your Medicare card indicate your beneficiary status . Most will have either and A or a B at the end of their number . If you have an A at the end you were a primary wage earner , a B , you are the spouse of a wage earner . A T at the end means you are not receiving SS benefits
Insurance Companies price their product without truly knowing what the costs will be . In doing that they look at hundreds of variables to determine a pricing outcome to present to you.In fact it is not uncommon for a specific carrier to have millions of price points in a state . So with that caveat let me try to be more specific . An important piece of the rating will be how long have you been driving ? Any tickets or accidents you have ? Whether you live on your own and rent , or are part of a family account with your parents , Or married or single . So it is best to try and get an agent or company to understand your personal situation and then the vehicle that you need to insure.Don ' t overlook the use of the vehicle . This a very important rating factor . If you commute , be sure your agent or company knows how often you do that . and how far away form your residence you travel . And if you are a student be sure to mention that you have a grade average of a '' B '' or better , if you do . Advise as well , about any drivers training you took in the last several years . What we see today is greater segmentation of blocks of similar , but different exposures and one thing that you might not realize is that carriers often even price your age in six months increments , meaning you get a better price at 23 than 22 and one half .
Yes , USAA does offer windshield replacement coverage . In fact , you can buy what they call `` Full Glass '' coverage , which will pay to repair or replace the windshield , windows , moonroof , sunroof , and even the T-top of your vehicle without a deductible if they are damaged . The cost is only a few dollars per month .
All great answers above ... . Yup ... the `` what , when , where , etc. '' is the key . ALSO ... how much coverage are you trying to buy ?? There are many `` guarantee issue '' plans out there -LRB- depending on age -RRB- . Some are instant coverage while others have a `` ramp up '' period before you get full coverage . `` Might be '' an option ... yet we don ; t know enough ab out you -LRB- age , sex , other history -RRB- . I once placed 5 policies in force for one dude ... he needed a specific amount for his divorce . The judge did n't care about the cost because of the underwriting mess he created . So ... 5 policies . He 's now down to 2 policies 3 years later . When I played high school basket ball , Air Jordan 's first arrived . EVERY KID wanted them . Yet , even way back then , they were SOOOO expensive -LRB- like your life rate will be right now -RRB- . Did I say , `` Screw you Jordan '' & go and play barefoot ? NO ... I bought `` what i could '' -LRB- OK . Dad bought what he could -RRB- & I played . I was still a starter . I still won a trophy at the tournament . Just like with your car insurance , the more time that passes , the less you 're penalized for the DUI . Each year you can assess your situation for a `` better value '' . Suggestion ... Do what you can right NOW & let time fix the rate issue .
No . If you read your policy , you will see in the Definitions Section , the definition of Insured . It would look similar to this `` Insured '' means you and residents of your household who are : a. Your relatives ; or b . Other persons under the age of 21 and in the care of any person named above . If your roommate is not a relative , he is not insured and would receive no benefit from the policy in the event of fire or liability claim . If you were apply for the insurance in your name and your roommates name , and the company issued a policy , then your roommate and you would be covered . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To Claim On Renters Insurance ?
If you are sued call your insurance company immediately . Your policy probably has a toll-free number for the claims office . If you suffer damage to your property you might want to discuss the claim with your agent before filing a claim . Sometimes the recovery will be insignificant after payment of the deductible . If you file the claim you could be charged a point which would raise subsequent premiums . It is just good to talk that through before notifying the claims department .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Most renters policies will cover a lost or stolen Iphone . However , after factoring in the deductible for your renters insurance and how an additional claim may affect your insurance rates , it may not be worthwhile to make that claim . Speak with your agent or broker to find out how this claim will affect you .
When renting a home , the home owner needs to have Landlords Insurance to provide coverage for the Dwelling and Premises Liability . The renter needs to buy Renters Insurance to provide coverage for Personal Property & Family Liability . Although both the Landlords policy and the Renters policy are not required by law , it is advisable to be covered in the event of a claim . Many large property management companies and property owners do require tenants to purchase Renters Insurance as a condition to the Rental Agreement ; the reason for this is to avoid lengthy and cumbersome legal issues in the event of a claim attributable to negligence . For a small premium the Renters Insurance provides the tenant with Family Liability coverage which will offer defense and payout damages up to the policy limit . Liability coverage will offer protection for negligence that may lead to a claim -LRB- i.e. accidental fire , smoke , water damage etc. . . -RRB-
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a renter 's loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Renter 's '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you as the insured must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value.Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52 inch HD TV when it was actually an 18 inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
There are many ways to purchase renters insurance online . Most major insurance companies will allow you to purchase directly thorugh their websites . There are also websites that give you access to many different companies at once . However , there are some things that concern me about purchasing insurance online . As a former agent for a top 3 insurance company , I would become the `` agent '' for individuals who had purchased their own insurance online . I consistently found problems and lack of coverage when I recevied these clients . My recommendation is to reach out to a local independent agent and tell them you are looking for renters insurance . This will give you the opportunity to build a relationship with that person and have them make recommendations for certain coverages . There are many additional coverages that are available on renters policies from water back-up , to identity theft coverage , and specific coverage for jewelry , collectibles , music equipment , etc. . It is best to discuss these options with a professional so you know exatly what is covered and how it is covered . While you can quickly purchase renters insurance online , you may leave yourself with gaps in coverage , which can become costly in the event of a claim . The process is not that much slower within an agency -LRB- we frequently put polices in place the same day -RRB- and you can be confident that you have the proper coverages . If you do not feel comfortable with the agent you are in contact with , ask friends and family who they work with and find someone you truly trust . Even though you are purchasing a fairly inexpensive renters policy , take your time to find the right solution for you . In the unfortunate event of a claim , you will be happy that you did .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Owning A Trampoline Affect Homeowners Insurance ?
For most insurance companies , presence of a trampoline is a cause for the company to decline the home . If a trampoline is detected on the property after the policy is issued , the policy will likely not be renewed .
Great question ! The best thing to do would be to check with your agent first , and ask . There are many injuries every year from trampoline accidents , so there is an increased risk . Typically increased risk = increased cost . I can assure you that should someone be injured on your property , on your trampoline , and they file a claim against you for the hospital expense , your trampoline will end up costing you plenty . If you have more questions , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Trampolines are an attractive nuisance not unlike the pond on the back forty , They are the source of a lot of additional liability exposure to the policy and the homeowner . The biggest reason that liability increases is because more than one child or person is one the equipment at a time . Most families with a trampoline have n't established risk-based rules for use and enjoyment and so what looks to be a fun and exciting play thing , becomes a hazard teeming with potential to cause great bodily harm . Insurance companies know from experience that trampolines cause losses and are expensive to insure because the injuries can become catastrophic . Broken bones are one thing . A broken neck with paralysis is completely another but well within the outcomes on a trampoline . Add to the trampoline an almost complete lack of training or instruction on the correct methods of use -LRB- and the lack of appropriate rules for use -RRB- , and we find the trampoline becomes similar to a loaded gun just waiting for curious hands with just as much potential to destroy a healthful life . Another issue that crops us is the degradation of the platform fabric since it is exposed to weather and sunlight . People have been known to bust through the platform because it became degraded due to the sun and weather effects . Bones get broke hitting the found and frame members below the deck . In my experience , most companies do n't want anything to do with insuring a home with a trampoline . A relative few do n't charge additional premium and do n't restrict the presence of a trampoline . Others still will permit a trampoline when it is is present for coverage at an additional charge . One carrier we represent charges an additional $ 75 annually for the trampoline , requires the fences to be installed -LRB- most trampolines come with them -RRB- , and they wo n't provide insurance on the home unless the trampoline is also included in coverage . All in all , you do n't simply have the choice to not insure the trampoline since the mere act of having one dramatically increases the chances of having a loss ! That said , trampolines can be enjoyed safely but it requires careful and near constant monitoring by the responsible adults , the establishment of rules for use , the ability to protect the equipment from non-invited use by neighbors when the owner or their children are not using the equipment , and inspection periodically for signs of degradation and normal wear and tear . Additionally , basic skills should be discussed , taught and understood , limits should be placed on the behavior that is allowed on the trampoline , and responsible adults should be willing to stop all play when careful control can not be maintained . Many injuries occur when the parents are not paying attention or aware from the home . Let 's face it , no one wants to be sued for the liability that may arise out of an injury on a trampoline and no one wants to deal with the often catastrophic injuries that can occur to your children or the neighbors . These latter comments and insight are a good foundation for understanding why an insurance company does n't like trampolines and why homeowner insurance is often negatively influenced when they are present on the property .
There are more than likely some companies out there that will write a homeowners policy with a trampoline on the property , but most will not . The liability issues with the trampolines have become very costly to many insurance companies . If you find a company that will accept the trampoline and not exclude it be prepared to pay a premium equal to the risk assumed by the carrier . Contact a local agent to find out if they have any carriers that they work with that accept trampolines as part of the homeowners policy .
Many companies refuse to issue a homeowners policy when there is a trampoline on the property . The trampoline is clearly identified as a hazard . Regardless of mechanisms to make them safe , there is still a high incidence of claims involving a trampoline . Companies that will insure a home with a trampoline will normally be considerably more expensive .
Good question . Many insurance companies will ask if you have a trampoline on the premises . If you do , it will likely make you ineligible for 50 % of the homeowners insurance companies in NY . If you have homeowners insurance already and you did n't have a trampoline -LRB- at the time of application -RRB- you can purchase a trampoline and coverage would be afforded under most policies . They key is to avoid making a material misrepresentation on the application . Of course , always check with your local independent agent .
Many companies refuse to write a homeowners policy on a home with a trampoline . Despite the safety devices that are often used , the trampoline has a record of claims that make it unacceptable to many companies . If you are already covered and purchase a trampoline there will probably not be any change until the company discovers the trampoline . You will probably be notified of either a cancellation or notified that the company will not renew coverage . In either event contact your agent .
Having a trampoline is a liability issue . Most property polices will exclude the use of a trampoline so if you are wanting to own a trampoline I highly suggest you search out an independent agent who can locate you an insurance carrier that would consider the use of a trampoline .
In determining the cost of a homeowners policy the company will consider the location of the property , the age of the property , the fire protection available , the estimated cost to rebuild the structure , the value of the contents , the presence of wood burning heating devices , and the type and condition of the roof . There are issues which may not affect the rate ; however , they may disqualify the property for coverage such as general condition , presence of a trampoline or unfenced swimming pool , and presence of certain breeds of dogs .
Trampolines are a major problem for insurance companies . Most insurance companies will not insure a home when they know that there is a trampoline present . Some insurance companies will accept a home with a trampoline . There are brokers who specialize in companies that handle special risk cases . You should consult the yellow pages and locate someone who can quote a policy with the trampoline .
Typically speaking yes . Home owners insurance carriers are going to want to see that the trampoline is secure , meaning in a fenced yard with a locked gate , . That is saying also that IF the carrier will even accept the risk of the trampoline . You should contact your independent insurance agent before purchasing a trampoline and ask them what their carrier would say about a trampoline .
The basic rate is computed by evaluating a standard home . Anything in your home that is different affects your individual premium . Some common considerations include how close is the house to the seashore , a river , or a hillside ? Is the house being properly maintained ? Are there dangerous objects on the property such as derelict cars , trampolines or unfenced swimming pools ? Has the house been the subject of recent claims ? These and other items indicate to an underwriter that this home is different from the standard home .
Trampolines may be fun but they are problematic for insurance companies . Some may reject coverage if one has a trampoline , while others may accept the risk so long as it is fitted with a perimeter fence or screen that can be locked when not in use . Trampolines , polls , and yard swing sets don/t in and of themselves cause premium increases , but they are `` attractive risks '' that increase the probabilities of a liability claim . Thus insurance companies consider properties that have them very carefully .
Great question ! The best thing to do would be to check with your agent first , and ask . There are many injuries every year from trampoline accidents , so there is an increased risk . Typically increased risk = increased cost . I can assure you that should someone be injured on your property , on your trampoline , and they file a claim against you for the hospital expense , your trampoline will end up costing you plenty . If you have more questions , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
For most insurance companies , presence of a trampoline is a cause for the company to decline the home . If a trampoline is detected on the property after the policy is issued , the policy will likely not be renewed .
It is possible , depending on your carrier . However , items like trampolines , swimming pools , swing sets etc , even if they do n't raise your homeowners insurance rate , certainly raise your liability exposure . For that reason , it is important to review the amount of liability protection your policy provides . Do you have enough if someopne got hurt and you were sued ? Be sure to have thecoverage that you need by increasing the liability coverage in your Homeowners policy and look into buying extra coverage in a Personal Umbrella Liability Policy . These begin coverage at $ 1,000,000 and can be increased as needed .
It may , yes . Many insurance companies wili require that the trampoline be outfitted with an installed safety net system that completely encloses the circumference of the trampoline . The opening of that system will also need to be able to be completely secured by a locking mechanism . In many cases , without this compliance , many companies will not offer coverage at all .
That 's a good question . You will need the following information . Your full name , Date of Birth , address of the home , phone number , the year the home was built , living square feet , condition of the home , updates completed for plumbing/electrical/heating / roof , list of pets , central station alarm information -LRB- if you have one -RRB- , wood burning stove answer -LRB- yes/no -RRB- , trampoline question -LRB- yes/no -RRB- , pool -LRB- fenced ? -RRB- , prior claims to the property and to you , and usually your social security number , purchase price , estimated rebuild cost and appraisal . Having all of that information will help you get the best rate possible on your homeowners insurance . Many insurance companies will have different tiers they can offer . Many factors go into rating a homeowners policy but generally it will depend upon your credit history , cost of reconstruction , prior claims and the deductible you choose . Hope this answer helps you !
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
There are several ways that you can purchase a renters policy . If you search the internet you will find some websites that will actually quote and issue a renters policy . The problem you face with this approach is that a policy is selected to pay your damages when you suffer a loss may be inadequate . It is quite likely that when you actually suffer that loss you will find that you are not sufficiently insured . Then the insurance policy you have been paying on becomes the most expensive policy that you could have purchased because it wont cover your loss . The better approach is to engage an insurance agent . You may not know an agent . Get recommendations from your neighbors , friends and colleagues . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . You really want everyone to be on the same page at the time of a loss . The agent will probably start by asking you the value of your personal property . To prepare for that question , I suggest that you take pictures of everything that you own . You can store that valuable record off site in case of a loss . Review the pictures and make an estimate of the cost to replace everything that you own . The sum of those estimates determines the value you need to set on your renters policy . Remember that you are looking at replacement value , not current value . In this process you might have property that is subject to internal limits within the policy . You need to specify the replacement value of any jewelry , guns , computer equipment , and collectibles . There are other classes of property that warrant special attention . Ask the agent about any unusual property that might be in your possession . The next thing that the agent will discuss is the liability limit . Insist on the highest limit that the agent can write . You can never have enough liability insurance . This protects you by providing for your defense and any awards against you up to the limits of the policy . You want these limits to be very high . A lawsuit can ruin your life . If you have a pet make sure that the agent knows about the pet . This is particularly important if you own a dog . Policies often have greatly reduced liability limits for dogs and may exclude all coverage for dogs of certain breeds or with a history of biting . This is a major source of claims . If you have a trampoline on the property makes sure that the agent knows that as well . Often owning a renters policy is a requirement of a lease . In those cases the landlord generally wants to be named as an additional insured . You need to have his or her name and address to provide to the agent . Incidentally , this is a reasonable requirement of the landlord and might be required by his or her insurance company . The final piece of information has to do with any losses that you might have previously suffered either at the unit you are currently renting or another unit . The information should be as detailed as possible to assist in underwriting your application .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Long Does Cobra Health Insurance Last ?
COBRA beneficiaries generally are eligible for coverage a maximum of 18 months . There are certain qualifying events that could extend the coverage . If the beneficiary stops paying the premium or if the employer stops providing the group health insurance the coverage could end earlier . Some plans offer a conversion from the COBRA plan to an individual plan at the end of the COBRA period .
In simple terms , a COBRA health insurance is a short-term continuation of the exact same group health plan you had with your employer prior to termination from that job . So , if you liked the coverage provided by the plan prior to termination , you will still like the coverage provided by the plan under COBRA administration because it is the same plan . What you may not like is the cost under COBRA administration . Many people incorrectly assume that COBRA rates are excessively higher than the rates you paid while employed . This is incorrect . By law , your insurance rates under COBRA can not exceed 102 % of the rate you were paying before termination . So , why does the COBRA premium seem so much higher than the premium prior to termination ? The answer is your employer 's contribution to your health insurance . While you were employed , your employer was definitely paying a portion of yours , the employee 's , health insurance premium . If you worked for a `` benefits rich '' employer , they may have been paying all your premium and even contributing some to your dependents ' coverage . Under COBRA , the employer no longer is responsible to contribute anything to your health insurance premium . You are therefore responsible for 100 % of your portion of the premium as well as that of your dependents . That is why the COBRA cost is more than you were seeing while employed . So , the real question then becomes is it cheaper for me to continue with my current group health plan under COBRA , or is there a better alternative in the personal health insurance marketplace . The only way to answer that question is to solicit quotes from personal health insurers .
Depending on the plan design and how your employer approaches it , either the last day of work or the last day of the month . After that , if your employer has 20 people at work on any given day , you should be offered COBRA continuation coverage . The 20 headcount for COBRA continuation can inlcude part time employees that are not part of the health plan . If your health plan was with a company of less than 20 active employees on any given day , you may still get some extended coverage . it 's going to depend on the state and plan design . In my state some insurers offer 3 months extended coverage for people who are n't COBRA eligible because of the size of the group .
Persons eligible for coverage and who were covered under the employer 's group health plan as of the date of the termination of employment of the employee are eligible for COBRA continuation . Generally this means the employee themselves and possiblytheir spouse and/or children . The COBRA Federal continuation requirements apply to companies with more than 20 employees , groups smaller than this operate under guidelines from their state insurance commissions that vary from state to state and are often not totally consistent with COBRA legal requirements . The most notable area of difference usually being the period of time a person can continue their coverage through the group . As such , the size of the employer group a person is leaving can also determine whether or not COBRA applies to them at all . One of the reasons COBRA was originally implemented was to keep people with pre-existing medical conditions from immediately losing their health insurance coverage when they lost a job . Since January 1 , 2014 pre-existing condition exclusions and underwriting have been eliminated and all individual policies have become guaranteed to be issued . In addition , for individual health insurance plans bought through the government health insurance marketplaces people can be eligible for premium subsidies with income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level . For these reasons , while COBRA continuation continues to exist , it is now only an option to be considered for an ex-employee and COBRA continuation is now often not the most cost effective option available . Exploring your options in the individual marketplace definitely makes sense and you should seek out the services of a health insurance broker who represents multiple carriers with products both inside and outside of the government marketplaces .
No , not really . If you are talking about the individual health insurance market then your freedom of movement has been severely restricted by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . So , outside of the annual open enrollment period each year you can only change your health insurance coverage if you experience a change of life status event or special election period as defined under ObamaCare . Some examples are getting married or divorced , having a child or moving to another state or outside your current carrier 's service area in your state . Similar restrictions apply if you are covered under a group health plan that offers multiple options or one of the new private health insurance exchanges that some companies are moving to . An increasingly common situation that many consumers are being or will be faced with is finding out that their favorite physician is no longer participating in the provider network of the health insurance plan they enrolled in . Cancelling your coverage to switch to a new insurance carrier in mid-year that does have your doctor as an in-network provider wo n't meet the criteria for a change of life status event or a special election period . You could cancel your old coverage but you would have to wait until the next open enrollment period and the first of the year to get new individual health insurance . Failure to pay your monthly insurance premium is also not a qualifying event and can leave you out in the cold until the next enrollment period so do n't think about that as a strategy to change insurance carriers in mid-stream . While this was tied into a continuation of coverage under COBRA issue , I recently witnessed a heartbreaking example of this situation . I received a frantic call from the girlfriend of a man who has terminal cancer . At first she was unsure as to his last day of being covered under his employer 's plan and whether he had continued his coverage under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . In fact , the initial information she gave me was that he had not continued his group coverage and was still within the 60-day window that a person has to purchase individual coverage after losing their employer based coverage . If this had been the case , even though the man was being treated for terminal cancer I would have been able to enroll him in major medical coverage that would have had to cover his care immediately . After digging into this man 's situation more deeply we discovered that he had elected to continue his coverage under his former employer 's plan , had paid the first month 's premium by check but had then failed to make his second month 's premium payment and had his COBRA coverage cancelled due to non-payment . The fact that this man was undergoing intensive chemo & radiation therapy and being given massive doses of pain medications made it understandable as to how he missed making that second premium payment but that did n't stop the COBRA plan administrator from terminating him for non-payment . Unfortunately , as cancellation of coverage for non-payment of premium is not a qualifying event the individual major medical carriers were within their rights to decline him for coverage until the next open enrollment period and coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . This has left the man uninsured at the worst possible time and has his friends and family raising money for his care . If he is still alive by the first of the year I 'll be able to get him coverage but his life expectancy is not that great but the bills he is accumulating are .
COBRA -LRB- the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act -RRB- is a program that was passed to allow people to continue group health insurance that would otherwise have been terminated . The most common users of COBRA are employees who leave their job where they had employer-sponsored health insurance , usually after being laid off or leaving the group on their own terms . COBRA coverage can be kept for up to 18 months and is only available to individuals and families covered under a plan with more than 20 employees enrolled . Your premiums under COBRA coverage are 102 % of the total cost of insurance this is important because many employers pay for part of the cost while the employee is still working . COBRA election applies to each person individually that is covered under a given health plan . Since health insurance is guaranteed issue under the affordable care act , you do not want to wait until your COBRA coverage expires to look for a new policy . Doing so can cost you a lot more money unnecessarily . Consult with an experienced health insurance broker to compare your options and see which plan option will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When changing jobs , deciding how to address your health insurance needs in the gap period between employer sponsored health insurance plans is both simpler and more complicated than ever before . The size of the employer group you are leaving will impact on your planning as well . If your employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation of coverage provisions will apply , these vary from state to state but they are usually for shorter periods of time than the Federal COBRA law requires . Employers with 20 + employees are subject to the Federal COBRA guidelines where most employees can continue their coverage for up to 18-months . Your continuation of coverage options to consider now in 2014 are ; 1 -RRB- Continuation of Coverage through Your Existing Employer 's Health Plan - you will need to notify your former employer of your intention to continue your coverage under their group plan within 63-days of your last day of employment . You must make premium payments in full and remit them in a timely manner to your former employer -LRB- or their administrator -RRB- each month to keep your coverage in effect . 2 -RRB- Short Term Medical Insurance - if you are healthy and pre-existing condition issues are not a personal concern and if you are confident that you will be obtaining new employment with benefits in the next several weeks to months then Short Term Major Medical Insurance may be an alternative to consider . Just because you can continue with your former employer 's coverage does not mean you are required to or that you will find it affordable . Short Term Medical plans are often far less expensive than group health insurance plans and in some cases may even offer you more coverage than your employer 's plan . A note of caution : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the minimum coverage requirements under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- so a person covered by such a policy may find themselves subject to the individual mandate tax penalty for the period of the year they are insured under such plans . 3 -RRB- Obtain Individual Major Medical Insurance - maybe your prospects for being quickly hired somewhere else are not strong at this time or perhaps you are considering taking a new career path -LRB- e.g - consultant , freelancer , contractor -RRB- , having health insurance independent of your employer may be the best solution . In this event you will want to explore your health insurance plan options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces and whether you would qualify for any premium tax subsidies . 4 -RRB- Qualification for Medicaid/CHIP , etc. - depending upon your income level and/or other life circumstances you may have to explore your coverage options under various state and/or Federal health benefit plans for you and/or your dependents . 5 -RRB- Go Without Coverage - not my recommendation but it is an option and an option than no small number of people choose each year . Considering the potential financial risk of an uninsured illness or injury this is really only an option of last resort and a person faced with such a situation should pursue their government coverage options if possible . That should pretty well cover all the possible ways to address your coverage needs between jobs .
No . Life insurance is not eligible for COBRA . COBRA only applies to health insurance so people leaving a group health insurance plan can continue the coverage up to 18 months after leaving the company . It 's only available to individuals and families covered under a plan with more than 20 employees enrolled . Your premiums under COBRA coverage are 102 % of the total cost of insurance this is important because many employers pay for part of the cost while the employee is still working . COBRA election applies to each person individually that is covered under a given health plan . Since health insurance is guaranteed issue under the affordable care act , you do not want to wait until your COBRA coverage expires to look for a new policy . Doing so can cost you a lot more money unnecessarily . Consult with an experienced health insurance broker to compare your options and see which plan option will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , COBRA is an extension of the current group health insurance plan offered to employees after they have left the company . This coverage can be kept for up to 18 months and is only available to individuals and families covered under a plan with more than 20 employees enrolled . Premiums for COBRA coverage are 102 % of the total cost of insurance this is important because many employers pay for part of the cost while the employee is still working . If you were only paying half of the premium before and your employer paid the other half , you would now be paying the entire thing yourself plus 2 % . Please note , COBRA election applies to each person individually that is covered under a given policy . If five family members are covered under a COBRA policy , they can all accept the coverage or accept it on an individual basis -LRB- for example , one or two family members accepting and three or four rejecting -RRB- . This is important because individual market health insurance can often be much less expensive than a COBRA policy , which can average $ 1,200-1 ,500 for a family and upwards of $ 2,500 per month for Cadillac plans at some companies . If you are in good health and offered COBRA coverage , do n't wait until it expires to look for a new policy . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
People can keep their health insurance by signing up for COBRA coverage . COBRA stands for the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act and is most commonly used when an employee leaves a job where they had employer-sponsored health insurance , usually after being laid off or leaving the group on their own terms . In short , COBRA is an extension of the current group health insurance plan offered to employees after they have left the company . This coverage can be kept for up to 18 months and is only available to individuals and families covered under a plan with more than 20 employees enrolled . Premiums for COBRA coverage are 102 % of the total cost of insurance this is important because many employers pay for part of the cost while the employee is still working . Under the Affordable Care Act , health insurance policies are guaranteed-issue in that you can not be declined for health insurance due to a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue . Coming off of group coverage would generally grant you a special enrollment period to apply for health insurance in the marketplace . If you 'd like some help with your coverage , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
A group plan will end one month after termination of employment . You 'll then have the option to go on COBRA Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act for up to 18 months . The upside to COBRA is you 'll have the same benefits as you 're used to having while employed and all your existing conditions will be covered . The downside is that it 's commonly very expensive . Without the employer portion you 'll be responsible for the full premium + 2 % . That has long been the case for owning individual health insurance . As long as your paying your premiums it does n't matter whom you work for . For more information on COBRA or to shop individual health plans visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
Your employment status does not effect your eligibility for individual health insurance coverage . The important question is how long have you been unemployed ? With the closing of the 2015 open enrollment period on February 15th an individual has to experience a `` change of life status event '' in order to enroll for coverage before next year 's open enrollment period . Loss of group health insurance coverage from a previous job is a change of life status event . You have 60-days after a change of life status event to enroll in individual coverage . You should have the option of enrolling directly with a major medical insurance carrier in your state or through the government health insurance marketplace . It should be noted that if you have recently lost employer based health insurance you should have the ability to continue your coverage through your former employer 's group health plan for some period of time . This will vary depending upon your state of residence and the size of your employer . If you worked for a company with 20 + employees they are subject to the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines and you could continue your coverage through them for up to 18-months as long as you pay the entire monthly premium in a timely manner . You have 63-days after termination of employment to exercise your COBRA continuation privilege . If you worked for a company with less than 20 employees then state continuation rules would apply and these do vary from state to state .
COBRA coverage can be kept for up to 18 months and is only available to individuals and families covered under a plan with more than 20 employees enrolled . Your premiums under COBRA coverage are 102 % of the total cost of insurance this is important because many employers pay for part of the cost while the employee is still working . COBRA election applies to each person individually that is covered under a given health plan . Since health insurance is guaranteed issue under the affordable care act , you do not want to wait until your COBRA coverage expires to look for a new policy . Doing so can cost you a lot more money unnecessarily . Consult with an experienced health insurance broker to compare your options and see which plan option will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How long does health insurance last after leaving a job ? Well going to depend on what size company you work for and when you separate service . If you work for a company that has 20 or more employees working on any given day , not even full time , your medical plan is subject to COBRA which allows for you to continue your coverage anywhere from 18 to 36 months depending on your situation provided you pay the premiums for coverage . If you plan on not continuing coverage , your term date will depend on the plan . Some stop coverage the day of termination , others the 15th of the month and others at month 's end . So it will depend on what your plan summary points out .
If you 're under a group health plan and you switch jobs , you lose the existing health insurance coverage -LRB- typically immediately or at the end of the month , varies by carrier and plan -RRB- unless you go on COBRA . Under COBRA , you 're continuing your existing health benefits , but you 're paying the entire premium plus 2 % -LRB- the employer typically shares the cost of premiums with their employees in group coverage plans - e.g. the employer pays 50 % and you pay the other 50 % -RRB- . If you do n't want to go on COBRA when your group coverage terminates , you would have a special enrollment period allowing you to secure coverage under an individual health plan - you would n't need to wait until the annual enrollment period opens up . If you had an individual health plan to start , you do n't have to do anything - your coverage will continue as normal because it 's not an employer-based health plan . I hope that helps answer your question . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Any employer can choose to drop health insurance . The question that usually pops up once the decision is made to drop coverage ... `` Can I go on COBRA ? '' COBRA is continuation of coverage under the current plan . Since the plan no longer exists , neither does the option for COBRA . Most employers give employees ample notice that they are no longer going to continue to provide health insurance for the group . Use the time to seek out and consult with an independent agent , who can help you .
The US Dept of Labor 's `` An Employee 's Guide to Health Benefits under COBRA The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 '' states the following : `` Life insurance is not considered ` medical care , ' nor are disability benefits ; and COBRA does not cover plans that provide only life insurance or disability benefits . '' Unfortunately , Disability Insurance is not covered by Cobra .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
It 's going to depend on the size of your employer . Cobra law comes into play if you work for an employer who on any given day has 20 or more employees actively at work . That does n't mean 20 employees on the medical insurance plan , just 20 employees at a given time . If you work for an employer in that situation you can go on Cobra continuance for 18 months at your expense plus a handling charge . That said , the question involves being fired . It will depend on `` what '' you were fired for ? Gross misconduct -LRB- example theft -RRB- would be grounds not to extend Cobra benefits to you . Getting fired for being late all the time , would not be considered Gross Misconduct . Usually your employer will have a handbook or employee guidebook that cites company policy as it pertains to benefits . With employers under 20 lives not subject to Cobra , there may not be any extended coverage.Depending on the carrier , the carrier may offer a 3 month continuation , but they are not obligated to do so .
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 -LRB- commonly known as HIPAA -RRB- protects patients medical information in that your personal information can not be shared with another party without your authorization . The other aspect of HIPAA that most people are familiar with is COBRA . COBRA allows you to continue employer coverage for a while after your employment has terminated . Under the affordable care act , coming off of group coverage does grant you a special enrollment period as it 's a qualifying event so you would want to compare options between COBRA and plans available on the individual market - an experienced health insurance broker can help you with this . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Purpose Of A Life Insurance Policy ?
A life insurance policy creates an immediate estate upon your death . Whether it is to replace lost income , pay off a mortgage , pay debt or other financial reasons , life insurance has many purposes . An experienced full-time broker or financial planner -LRB- not part-timers , radio-tv or unrelated worker -RRB- is your best resource to help you determine which type of policy to buy and where to purchase it .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
What is the primary purpose of life insurance ? What everthe policy owner wants it to be . Every purpose can be different . While dating myself a little bit by saying this . . Life insurance is the silly putty of financial products . It is a product that has many forms and can be used in many ways . One person 's primary purpose may be someone else 's 5th choice . It 's not unheard of to start a first time client meeting with the question `` what do you want your life insurance to do ? ''
The main purpose of life insurance is to protect your family or business from the costs associated with your death . When a funeral causes relatives to have to pool their resources to pay for it , that is a purpose where life insurance could have helped . When a business must be sold to an outside party because a relative can not afford to buy it , that is a purpose where life insurance could have helped . When a family must go on welfare because the breadwinner passed away , that is a purposed where life insurance could have helped .
There is actually not a type of life insurance call Viatical Life Insurance , but life insurance is purchased from the policy owner as part of a `` viatical settlement '' , or `` life settlement '' . In order to sell one 's policy as part of a viatical settlement , the policy must have cash value and the insured person must have a decreased life expectancy . The purpose is to provide the insured with cash while still alive , while the entities who are buying the policy are banking on making more from the death benefit than what they paid for the policy . Most new cash value policies now ask whether the policy is being taken out for the purpose of being sold , because this defeats and misrepresents the purpose of life insurance . For those with existing policies who find themselves with a severe or terminal illness , and insurance rich and cash poor , a viatical might be a benefit . But you must be very careful and look at every angle before going down that road .
These are two very different products that serve 2 different purposes so it ca n't be said whether one is better than the other . 401k 's are generally funded to be used for retirement savings purposes that can be accessed during your senior/retirement years . During your working life , many employers will offer to match all or a portion of the funds you place into your 401k -LRB- varying on a number of factors -RRB- . The intended purposes of whole life insurance are to create large sums of money quickly in the event the insured dies . It 's typically used as a form of protection to pay off debts -LRB- so your family is not burdened with those expenses -RRB- , provide income to a surviving spouse , leave a legacy to the insured 's loved ones , etc. . While whole life insurance does build cash value that you can borrow against , it 's actually creating a loan against the policy and is expected to be paid back -LRB- interest would be charged like you would have on a loan from a bank -RRB- . Cashing out a policy can be done , but you lose the protection of the life insurance and you may be subject to surrender charges and/or taxes on any gains -LRB- cash value amount is higher than total premiums paid into the policy -RRB- . When you buy life insurance , you 're buying it for the purposes of the death benefit protection - it 's not typically considered/used as an investment/retirement savings vehicle .
The purpose of insurance , in general , is to provide economic protection against losses that may be incurred due to a chance happening or event . An insurance policy provides this protection by accumulating funds to meet those uncertain losses . Human life value , which is what Life insurance protects , is what a person would earn , or what it would cost to replace the services of that person , in the future . The primary purpose of life insurance is to conserve and protect human life value so that others will not be too negatively affected economically in the event of the insured person 's death .
There is no way to say what life insurance will cost for any one person . Good life insurance is a policy that has some guarantees , is with a good company , and accomplishes the purposes for which you are purchasing it . To find what the cost of good life insurance for you , you 'd need to contact an agency that will help you discern your purposes for your policy , then find your best rate from a good life insurance company .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
Ironically , the purpose of a disclosure statement in life insurance policies is , partly , to describe the purpose and importance of the disclosure . The disclosure statement will state what the policy is intended to do , and what the policyholder 's responsibilities are . It will outline the coverage , cost , personal information of the insured , source of the insurance , and certification and maintenance of the policy .
What does life insurance do ? That is a great question . Auto insurance pays to repair your car , home insurance pays to repair your home , health insurance pays to repair your health . But life insurance does not pay to repair your life . Rather , life insurance pays when death occurs . It 's purpose is to `` repair '' some of the financial damage that is incurred upon the death of a loved one and/or provider . That is not all life insurance does - there are many reasons that people purchase life insurance . But it is the basic purpose .
Insurable interest is what ensures that someone can not take a life insurance policy on you with the purpose of making money on your death . It is insurance fraud to take out a policy on an older or terminally ill person just to collect money on their death ; or even worse , to kill someone for the purpose of collecting their life insurance . In order to prevent fraud and to protect their policyholders , all life insurance policies use some measure of insurable interest .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
What is not covered under term life insurance ? Well , the same things that are covered under Universal Life and Whole life are covered by term . . It is just term is a single purpose policy . That is a term policy pays a death benefit , while both Universal and Whole life can have other purposes .
How long one needs life insurance depends upon the purpose of the life insurance . If the purpose is to cover a 5 year bank loan , then you need it for 5 years . If the purpose is to pay estate taxes , then you need it to last until the 2nd spouse has passed away . If you need it until your mortgage is paid off , then you need it for that number of years , etc. , etc. . Point is , first define the need , then it 's easy to figure the length of time .
If you fill out a life insurance application , it will ask that very question : `` What is the purpose for your life insurance policy ? '' That is because the purpose varies from person to person . Some purposes for which people buy life insurance are : 1 -RRB- To replace their income that would be lost upon their death . 2 -RRB- To hire others to replace their contributions to the family that would be lost upon their death -LRB- daycare , transportation , cleaning services , lawn services , etc -RRB- 3 -RRB- To give a business time and resources to replace an employee when a key employee dies . 4 -RRB- To pass their estate to their heirs in a tax friendly fashion . 5 -RRB- To pay taxes , administrative fees , and debts upon their death . 6 -RRB- To pay for chronic , critical or terminal illness expenses -LRB- when the policy has living benefits -RRB- 7 -RRB- To pay off mortgage , school loans , business loans , and other debts . 8 -RRB- To pay for all final expenses , including funeral , memorial service , burial , transportation , etc. 9 -RRB- To leave a gift to charity . 10 -RRB- To provide cash value for retirement .
If life insurance is for estate purposes , it should be owned by a trust . If the life insurance is in a pension plan , it is own by the company trustee . If life insurance is part of Captive Insurance planning , then it could be owned by an outside entity or it could be owned by the Captive . If the life insurance is for business purposes , then either the business or a combination of the business and the insured are usually the owners/joint owners of the policy . Sometimes a trust will own those policies as well . For life insurance between husband and wife , ownership always depends on individual circumstance .
Life insurance creates cash at death . This cash can be used for many purposes including paying debts . Sometimes people will purchase life insurance to cover a specific loan or mortgage . Different products can be used for this purpose . An independent life insurance broker , who represents several companies , can help you find the right product at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Minors can certainly be named as a beneficiary to an insurance policy . But what you want to consider is what the purpose of the insurance is . If you want the insurance to cover your final and burial expenses then you may not want to name a minor because he or she will not have access to the money until age 18 or 21 depending on where you live . If the purpose is to leave a legacy for the minor , the best thing to do is create a living trust . Name the trust as the beneficiary and earmark those funds for the minor . A living trust is very flexible . You can basically say when and for what reason the minor can have access to the funds . You can say that money can be paid for the minors private education ; you can say the minor gets 25 % at age 21 , etc. . And the best part is whatever you have specified ca n't be changed after your passing AND the trust does not go through probate . So , there is no court intervention or delays .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Claim A Life Insurance Policy ?
Each insurance company has there own process however they are similar to each other . You will have to ask for a claim request form . A local agent should be able to help . You will also need the death certificate showing cause of death . Once verified , the insurance company should release the death benefit within a few days . Be sure to follow up through the process .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The other respondents explain that two basic triggers exist within common liability coverage policies . It is important to realize that most personal insurance - auto , home , motorcycle , rv - are based upon the occurrence trigger in the insurance policy . An occurrence is an event including repeated exposures to the same condition , that cause loss covered by the policy . You 'll understand that if the loss `` occurs '' during the policy period , the loss is coverable and a duty to defend exists until such time as it is determined after further investigation that coverage is not provided by the policy . At that time the carrier would probably extend a `` reservation of rights '' letter to you to notify you that the investigation of the loss events are revealing to the carrier that the loss is not covered for some reason contained within the policy or due to the events that occurred . Nevertheless , if the loss `` occurs '' during the period the policy was effective , and barring exclusions and limitations , their is coverage in an occurrence policy . A `` claims made '' policy changes what triggers the benefits of the policy . In the case of claims made coverage , generally only written on business and professional liability exposures , the trigger is the event and when it occurred . What is different now is that the claims must be first made during the period of coverage or a subsequent policy . If a claim is permitted to be made on subsequent policies , the chain of coverage needs to be uninterrupted and the `` retroactive '' date for coverage to be set to a point before the actual date of the loss . Claims Made policies were designed to help eliminate the chance that years and years of coverage on an occurrence policy could not be stacked one upon the other to generate large amounts of coverage . In the case of claims made policies , only the current policy limit is exposed to loss and not a stack of limits from policies covering prior annual periods . One other point that is necessary to understand . Generally , there are limitations on how long after a policy is cancelled for a claim to be presented . Occurrence policies are much more accommodating here . On the other hand , claims made policies have a limited period of time after the policy ends for a claim to be made . This is referred to as extended discovery and extended discovery on otherwise unendorsed policies is only 60 days . That is , you only have sixty days to present a claim for coverage at the end of a claims made policy . Additional extended periods of discovery are available at additional cost but each carrier may have different periods of discovery available . This feature on a claims made policy provides the `` tail '' of coverage that an occurrence policy includes without additional charge . A `` tail '' is the time beyond the period of coverage where a claim may be first reported or appear on the books of the carrier . Liability type losses can have a long `` tail '' due to the nature of the coverage and potential loss . Property losses , on the other hand , generally have short `` tails '' where the loss is not known . The reserve that the carrier must maintain within its accounting for these losses is not as the IBNR -LRB- incurred but not reported -RRB- loss reserve . Over time the carrier reduces this reserve in recognition that the further past the end of a policy that they travel , the less likely a loss has occurred or will be reported . This should help you understand just how much must taken into account to answer your generalized question . I hope this helps answer your question .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
When you need to file a Homeowners Insurance Claim , the best and quickest way to handle it is to call the CLAIMS Telephone number listed on your Homeowners Insurance declarations page . Most carriers have a 24 Hour reporting line for claims ; the station is staffed by an individual trained to take an initial report and pass it on to the assigned claims adjustor based on the type of claim and geographical location of the loss . Once the preliminary report is taken , a claims number is assigned , an adjustor is assigned and the preliminary record is report to the National Database also known as CLUE ; CLUE is a tool used industry wide to review prior claims activity on homes . The CLUE report will later be updated eventual showing the Closed Status and total amount paid by the insurance carrier to resolve the claim . When making the initial claim report , it is beneficial to only offer a simple and general explanation of the nature of the loss ; it is always better to give all the details directly to the claims adjustor as the initial claims report is usually not taken by a person licensed and trained with the capabilities of the insurance adjustor.In most cases , the insurance carrier will assign and adjustor who will make an initial contact within 1 business day . The adjustor will make an appointment to come out and review the damages claimed , a detailed estimate of the required repairs will be prepared and the adjustor willinterpret the policy to determine if and to what extent coverage applies to the damage incurred ; the final process will be a resolution letter mailed to the insured with a full accounting of the situation and perhaps an associated check for repairs . In some cases , an initial payment may be offered holding back thedepreciated portion of the loss until thedamages or items are replaced after which the carrier will reimburse the insured for the full replacement cost of the items as long as the policy coverseverything on a replacement cost basis . Any specificquestions regarding a loss should be directly discussed with the claims adjustorwho is licensed and responsible to handle the complete transaction and explain the processto the insured . Prior to any claim occurrence , it may alsobe a good idea to contact a licensed insurance representative to learn the process and best recommended method of handling thesituation should youencounter a claim .
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
If it is the Insured person and Policy Owner who has the claims against them , and they die and leave the life insurance proceeds to a beneficiary , the beneficiary does not have to pay the claims of the Insured unless they co-signed for that debt . If there is no beneficiary and the life insurance money ends up in the estate , creditor claims can be filed during probate . If it is the beneficiary who has the claims against them , it depends on the state of residence as to whether a claim can be filed against the beneficiary 's life insurance proceeds , and/or how much of the death benefit is subject to creditor claims .
How does a health insurance claim work ? Let 's follow a claim . First the billing is created in the doctor 's office where staff submits a claim for payment to an insurance company . This could be done anywhere from that day or later that month , depending on the office . I have known of providers who have sent collection notices before they 've even gotten around to billing . When the claim arrives at the insurance company it goes straight to the claims departement where the informaion is entered into the computers . Basically the claims person gets the bill , data entries the necessary information and hits enter . From that point on , most claims are untouched by human hands . The claim information goes into the computer where it is compared to the coverage the insured has . From that a payment and explaination of benefits page are created and sent on their ways . When I use the term untouched by human hands I mean not everything processed is checked to see if the parameters -LRB- plan design -RRB- are correct . Usually , only billings above a certain size are rechecked for accuracy . Years ago the threshold was 20,000 got a second look by a human for accuracy . Companies leave it up to the insured to find any small errors and call in for corrections . The cost of double checking every claim would be astronomical .
The long and short is answer is yes and no . If it were only that easy . There are several factors that play into premium increases due to claims . The first is the insurance company policies and underwriting . Also , what type of business are you in . Followed by the two biggest factors in premium changes due to claims , which are frequency and severity . The frequency is the number of claims that you have and how often they occur . Also are your claims predictable or are they unforeseen . Severity refers to the size or dollar amount of the claim . All of these factors and more will go into the decision to change your premium . If it is a claim that can happen again and there are no risk management procedures in place at your business , that is not in your favor . If you have a rather large claim that exceeds your premium that is also not in your favor . If you shop insurance companies every year and have no loyalty to the carrier , that is not in you r favor . If you are late paying your premium or have minimum coverage limits that can also be viewed negatively . Conversely , if you do the opposite of the above mentioned , then a single claim maybe considered a rare occurrence and not worthy of effecting your premium the following year . The best thing to do is get with your agent and discuss all the facets of the claim and what best course of action to take .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
How much your rate can be effected by a claim depends partially on how the carrier surcharges . Also the type of claim is a factor . Claims like liability , fire and theft rate much higher then wind and water . In many cases you may see no change at all while other could be hundreds of dollars . Also even if there is no charge for the claim many homeowners may be receiving a claim fee discount that would no longer apply so this would effect your rate .
Let me differentiate between a liability claim and a property claim . If you are sued , notify the claims office of the insurance company immediately . Do not sign any papers and do not make any statements to agents of the individual or company suing you . Never hesitate to submit a liability claim . If your home is uninhabitable because of a covered loss such as fire or lightning call the insurance company claims office immediately . If you are the victim of a disaster , call the claims office immediately . Many insurance companies have mobile claims operations that are dispatched to help victims of disasters . Any damage to your home is a big deal . However , if the damage is not more than two times your deductible , and it pays to know your deductible , call your agent first . Property insurance policies have varying features that can either reduce the deductible or reduce the premium if your policy is claims free . Sometimes a little pencil work will show that it is better to forgo the claim as the reductions you receive for being claims free could be greater than the amount you would recover . If there is water damage and you can not reach your agent quickly enough contact the claims office because water damage only gets worse ! Often a quick responding water mitigation team can reduce and almost eliminate the loss .
Oh wow , unfortunately there is no black and white answer to this question . It varies drastically from carrier to carrier but also from claim to claim . Your actual claim will determine a lot about how long the process will take to full resolution . If it is a simple `` fender bender '' where things are pretty cut and dry , you are talking a matter of a couple of days ... with our carriers and on claims like this as soon as the field adjustor can get out to inspect the car , they are usually cutting a check on the spot . If seen claims like this close in a day , but also have seem them take a couple of days to close simply due to scheduling issues . More serious claims take longer . If fault is in questions and police reports have to be pulled , this takes time . If there are serious injuries or death , these take a lot of time . Typically you do n't have to wait until the claim is settled to start the repairs on your vehicle . If you car is `` totaled '' you might have to wait until it is settled . Each claim and carrrier is different and you have the right to stay informed about the process . Your adjustor will no more than your agent so stay in contact with them and ask them direct questions about the length of time things should take and what you should expect during the process . Contact your local independent agent and ask them specifics on the claims process of their carriers .
Renters Insurance rates are based on two primary factors . # 1 - the amount of coverage required for two specific areas , and # 2 - the rating of the individual and location . Let 's look at # 1 first . Renters Insurance provides coverage for Loss , Theft and Damage for personal property of the insured , and a level of coverage for personal liability as well . The insured selects the coverage based on the amount of personal property they own . They can also choose to select either an Actual Cash Value policy or a Full Contents Replacement policy . The ACV policy will be less expensive , but will pay out less on a claim , as the ACV factors in depreciation of the item . On a Full Contents Replacement policy , the premium is higher , but the policy will usually pay the original purchase price of the item . Of course , both policies will subtract the deductible before paying out a claim . For # 2 , the rating factors , the insurance company will look at several items , such as age of the policy owner , how many adults are living in the property , if the insured individuals are smokers or non-smokers , the type of construction of the building , the safety and security features installed -LRB- if any -RRB- in the residence , any prior claims the insured may have on their record , and a few other items . The policy premium can be reduced based on the establishment of various discounts , such as Multi-Policy discounts . So the best answer I can give you is to talk to a licensed , professional insurance agent , and always get multiple quotes . Do n't just choose the cheapest quote however . Make sure you understand the differences between the underlying policies , how claims are handled and etc. . Just because one policy is less expensive than another does n't mean it is better .
How long a claim takes really depends in most cases how soon or fast the insurance company can get all the information . The sooner all reports , statements and documents are turned in the faster a claim can be handled . Claims adjusters have no desire to keep a claim on their desk and wish to get people whole again as soon as possible .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does An Auto Insurance Deductible Mean ?
It is the portion of the damage that you are responsible to pay for in the event of a claim . A good example is if you have a $ 1000 deductible and have damages for $ 10,000 , you would receive $ 9000 as the $ 1000 deductible is what you are responsible for . Hope this helps you .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
A higher deductible will decrease the premium you will pay for the auto insurance , but that does n't necessarily mean it is better . A higher deductible also means you will pay more out of pocket if you are involved in an accident . The decision of higher deductible vs. higher premium is one that should be based on what you can pay in case of an accident , and not necessarily what the monthly payment will be , but that is a discussion you should certainly have to determine which option is better for you .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Symbols are used to designate various types of auto coverage on a business auto policy . They range from 1-9 and 19 for business auto , 21-31 for garage keepers coverage , 41-50 and 59 for truckers , and 61-71 and 79 for motor carriers . For example , symbol 1 refers to `` Any Auto '' and is the broadest designation , allowing the coverage for any automobile an insured my find the need to drive . Symbol 10 is one of the ` custom ' symbols , meaning the use of the vehicle has a meaning that has been modified from one of the standard symbol designations for that class of vehicles . In these cases , the auto in question does not fit 100 % into one of the standard symbol designations , so the insured and the insurer agree to a custom definition of use .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The short answer is , `` usually not . '' Commercial auto policies are in place to provide liability and collision coverage for work related vehicles . Insurance companies view commercial autos as instruments necessary for work , which means they will be used on a daily basis . This means there will be more driving and greater exposure . Think about it this way , when you are getting personal auto insurance the insurance company will ask what is the purpose of having your vehicle and how far will you be driving . For commercial auto policies it is assumed this will be increased . I hope this helps .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
Collision is a defined term in the Personal Auto Policy , so there is not a lot of debate about what collision means . According my copy of the Personal Auto Policy published by The Insurance Service Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- , Form PP 00 01 01 05 , Part D - Coverage For Damage To Your Auto , Paragraph B. . . Collision means the upset of your covered auto or a non-owned auto or their impact with another vehicle or object . Loss caused by the following is considered other than collision : 1 . Missiles or falling objects ; 2 . Fire ; 3 . Theft or larceny ; 4 . Explosion or earthquake ; 5 . Windstorm ; 6 . Hail , water or flood ; 7 . Malicious mischief or vandalism ; 8 . Riot or civil commotion ; 9 . Contact with bird or animal ; or 10 . Breakage of glass . If breakage of glass is caused by a collision , you may elect to have it considered a loss caused by collision . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
A deductible simply means that you have to pay for some of the losses before your insurance company will pay anything . Unfortunately in health insurance deductibles are more complex than in auto or homeowners insurance . The deductible is the amount of money you 'll have to pay out of pocket during a calendar year before the policy will start paying . If you have a $ 1,000 deductible your insurance company wo n't cover the first $ 1,000 of health expenditures you have in a calendar year . Once you meet your deductible for the year , they will pay a large percentage of the losses over the deductible .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
Not quite sure what you mean . Do you mean needing auto insurance for some time until you buy a car , or needing auto insurance right before you buy a car and drive off the lot ? If you 're about to buy a car , all you need is the VIN # of the vehicle before binding a policy . If you mean needing insurance now without owning a car , you will need either a named operator policy or a broad form named driver policy , depending on the state you live in .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can You Buy Short Term Disability Insurance ?
Yes , you can buy short term disability insurance . There are less than a handful of companies that sell it as an individual policy , that I know of . It is much easier to get short term disability insurance through a group . On the other hand , it is not difficult to find individual long term disability coverage , and most people can buy long term disability insurance at a reasonable price .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
An individual can buy a short term disability policy , but there are very few choices in the private market . For someone going to a company to buy a disability insurance policy on their own -LRB- not through their workplace -RRB- , you will have many more options to buy long term disability than short term disability insurance .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can buy short term disability insurance . There are less than a handful of companies that sell it as an individual policy , that I know of . It is much easier to get short term disability insurance through a group . On the other hand , it is not difficult to find individual long term disability coverage , and most people can buy long term disability insurance at a reasonable price .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is a huge inventory of disability insurance companies that carry short term disability and some short term disability group plans for business . Before purchasing short term disability insurance , make sure your employer does n't offer it . Here are a few on short term disability companies that come to mind Mutual of Omaha , Aflac , Lincoln Financial Group .
Short term disability insurance pays a percentage of your salary for a specified amount of time if you are ill or injured and can not perform the duties of your occupation . Please note , you may be required to use up your sick days -LRB- if applicable -RRB- before your short term disability coverage will start making payments . If you have short term coverage , you may want to consider supplementing it with long termdisabilityinsurance as many people who need to use their short term disability coverage will often be unable to work for longer than the short term plan allows . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your disability insurance program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Disability insurance is offered as short term disability , generally two years , and long term disability , generally to age 65 . The elimination or waiting period needs to be established on the basis of your cash reserves . And keep in mind that many employer sponsored group plans include short term disability coverage . Having short term disability coverage may allow you to purchase long term disability coverage with a longer elimination period .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
The types of Disability Insurance that you can buy on your own come in two types : Short Term Disability Insurance and Long Term Disability Insurance . Of the two , Long Term Disability Insurance is most commonly purchased . When provided by an employer , Sick Leave is also a type of Short Term Disability Insurance .
Before shopping for short term disability insurance , first determine if your employer 's group benefit plan offers it . If your an executive or key person in the company , you may ask for short term disability insurance to be added to your compensation package . Short term disability benefits usually is designed for two years . Short term disability is paycheck protection against illness or injury recovery .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the MOST favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the worst definition as you must meet more requirements than a true own occupation or modified own occupation to receive a benefit payout . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately with a true own occupation or modified own occupation policy or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own . This is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance For My Parents ?
You can get a small amount of life insurance for your parents for final expense needs . If you want a larger amount , you would need to show that you share a financial relationship with them , and would suffer financially from their deaths . E.g. . If you live with them or they live with you .
Yes , but it depends on the circumstances as to why you would need to purchase life insurance on your parents . If you would be financially responsible to pay for their final expenses at their deaths , certainly yes . You would be able to purchase enough life insurance to cover those expenses with their knowledge and permission . If you are financially dependent upon their income then yes you could purchase a policy with their knowledge and permission . If the reason is just pure financial gain then no you would not be able to purchase life insurance with or without their permission .
Yes you can get life insurance for your parents . You will need their permission to insure them , but since you would have insurable interest you can take out and own a policy . Note : In Canada , when you transfer ownership there is usually a deemed disposition . In other words a taxable gain is triggered . This does not apply in certain family situations . Which creates a planning opportunity for generational wealth transfer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Two parts to the yes on this questions . First is you need to let them know you are going to do that and get their permission . Second is , apart from final funeral expense coverage , you would have to show an insurable interest , meaning some financial dependence upon them . If , for example , they are paying you each month , or lending you money , that would be an insurable interest . If you have no relationship with them , then you could not get a policy on them , but they could get a policy on themselves to benefit you . This would , of course , in any event , depend upon their own insurability , meaning mostly their own health . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Yes , a child can get life insurance for a parent . The parent must sign the application and do the exam , if an exam is required . If there is no exam required , the application process often involves a phone interview , and the parent must be able to answer the interview questions on their own . If you support your parent in any way , you can get a policy to help reimburse you after your parent passes . If you do not financially support your parent , you are still eligible to get your parent a small final expense policy . Contact an online final expense life insurance agency to get prices and types of policies available . It is a great thing you are doing ; all the best to you and your parent .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
The best place to start in purchasing life insurance for a parent is to discuss the idea with them . They will , at a minimum , need to sign the application , so you can not do it without their knowledge . If they apply for a small , simplified issue policy , they will probably need to do a phone interview with the insurance company . If applying for a larger policy , they will need to take a life insurance exam that my include an EKG and questions to test their cognitive function . If they are not willing to participate in the application process in any way , they can get guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- but will still need to sign the application -RRB- . In this first conversation , you can get an idea of what type of policy to look for by asking them how involved they want to get in the application process . At this time , you should also get a list of their medications and current and past health conditions . Most adult children are unaware of their parents ' complete health history . If your parent does not want to share that with you , they should contact an agent themselves , for their quote . You can find the most competitive rates for your parent at agencies that sell a selection of products . If the policy is going to be under $ 50,000 , there are agencies that specialize in those . The agency may call that type of policy Senior Life , as our agency does . Or they may call it Burial Insurance , Funeral Insurance , or Final Expense Insurance . If you are looking for a larger face amount , contact an agency that is experienced in Senior Life Insurance . If your parent has very serious health issues , Guaranteed Issue may be the way to go . Most companies will allow a child to pay for a policy for their parent . Whether or not you can own the policy will depend on a variety of factors . If you approach the purchase with the preparation explained above , it can be a very easy process and leave your parent feeling fulfilled , rather than frustrated .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
At what age can you get life insurance ? Usually `` you '' can purchase life insurance from the age of 18 on . Life insurance is considered a contract and in order to have a binding contract both parties must be of legal age . An insurance company can not contract with a 10 year old or a 15 year old legally . So how did my kids get life insurance before age ten ? Because I `` own '' the policies as their parent . I had an insurable interest to insure my kids and I went into a contract with an insurance carrier . My kids are simply the insured and because at the time of purchase they were not of age to be party to a legal contract , they can only be the insured until 18 and I could sign over ownership at that point in time .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
To buy life insurance for a parent , start by contacting an agency that specializes in final expense life insurance . I have found that when a child is buying life insurance for a parent , most parents would rather not take an exam . Final Expense Life Insurance agents have a broad range of policies , and can accommodate that desire to avoid an exam , if that is preferred . You will want to gather your parent 's health history , or have your parent prepared to get on the phone to answer health questions with a life insurance representative . A list of their medications and incidences of illness or hospitalizations in the past 10 years are helpful to know to get the best price . If you want the policy to be for final expense needs , you will most likely want permanent life insurance . Be sure to get a policy that will not go up in price , or you could end up being unable to afford the policy before it is needed .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
If you have individual health insurance the answer is definitely - NO . If you are covered under an employer 's group health plan the answer is almost always No as well . However , there is a very narrow circumstance where you might be able to add a parent onto your group coverage . I 've never seen it in real life but here 's how I understand it could be approached . First , you have to determine if your parent qualifies as a dependent under IRS guidelines . IRS guidelines say that if your parent is under age 65 , they have an annual income of less than $ 3650 and you pay more than half of your parent 's total support for the year you can claim them as a dependent . As you can see , these a some pretty hard criteria to meet but I 'm sure there have to be some people out there that fit this profile . Next , you will have to have a serious meeting with your employer and have family coverage available through your employer 's health plan . You ca n't add your parent as an individual . If your current coverage level is employee only you would have to change it to a level where two or more adults can be covered -LRB- e.g. - family coverage -RRB- . You must be prepared to provide documentation -LRB- tax filings , etc. -RRB- to your employer to support your request and , in all candor , I 'd visit with a family lawyer before meeting with your employer . It is highly likely that your HR person or the business owner has never been presented with this situation before and it 's such a rare situation that in some ways it defies common sense and is at odds with what is commonly accepted business personnel practices . Until your question prompted me to do some research my initial reaction was `` no way '' and I 've been in the business for 30 years . You should n't expect this to be easy to accomplish , you may have to be the educator and you may find yourself having to deal with your employer , their insurance broker/consultant and probably the health insurance carrier themselves and to be expecting resistance every step of the way .
Life insurance on a child should never be at the expense of life insurance on the breadwinner . Historically these policies were sold door to door on a weekly premium basis . While parents were concerned about the possible cost of the death of a child they were actually sold as savings plans . My parents gave me my paid up $ 2000 policy when I got married . Today the reason to buy such a policy is even more obscure . A small number of children become uninsurable and a very small number die ; however , this insurance might still help bring peace of mind to a parent .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To Compare Home Insurance ?
The traditional way to compare home policies is to take the declarations page to another agent and ask for a comparison . You might want to do that with several agents . There are some websites that purport to compare coverages and prices . The issue isnt which company has the lowest premium but which policy provides the coverage that you require . If you paid less and the company failed to cover a loss you would have made quite a poor investment . It is better to know what coverages are available and get advice on which are appropriate . I live in an arid part of the USA . However , one of the largest floods in history took place right here . I might want flood insurance even if I am miles from a stream . This and other coverages might come to bear and evaluating the risk is what your agent can help you do . If you have a policy and in twenty years pay $ 200 more than some other company , if you have the right coverages because an agent went over the policy carefully with you , you are the winner , not the loser . Good coverage means a good nights sleep !
Start by talking to your Insurance Professional . It is important not only to compare coverage offerings and policy extensions and limitations , but also the companies that are offering this protection . Proposals and suggested coverage should be based upon the result of a careful Reconstruction Analysis which will determine the amount of recommended coverage for your home .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
Let me ask you this : expensive compared to what ? A Maserati is expensive compared to a Honda . A 50 room mansion is expensive compared to a studio apartment . The cost of hiring a chief executive officer for your company is expensive compared to the cost of hiring a file clerk . I think you have to look at what youre getting for your dollar . And what your other options might be . Lets suppose you go through prequalification . Then underwriting . Then you get approved . Then you get your policy and pay for it . You submit one monthly premium payment . And then tragically , you die . Your beneficiary will then get the full benefit . Within a week or so . You may have paid only a few hundred dollars , but the benefit could be in the millions . You may paid only a few thousand dollars , but the benefit could be in the tens of millions . That is a pretty good deal . Lets suppose your premium was $ 500 a month , and your benefit was $ 5 million . That could happen , depending on age and other underwriting factors . If you decided to not purchase life insurance , how much money would you have to invest , at what interest rate , over what period of time , to accumulate $ 5 million ? The fact of the matter is that for the vast majority of people , they would end up spending much more money on that investment than they would on life insurance . So the real question is why is self-insurance so expensive ? How can buying a life insurance policy be so much cheaper than trying to fund your financial security out of your own resources ? And dont forget the big game-changing factor : we never know when our time will come . Dont assume time will be on your side so you could eventually collect the money to self-insure .
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
There are many factors in determining your rates . From the age of your home the state and how far you are from the fire department and what your home is made of . Your credit can play factor also . Is it a full replacement cost policy or an actual cash policy . They key is to make sure that you are properly covered . To give you and example in Montana I have insured a 390K valued hand hewn log home for as little as 900 a year and a stick frame home work 150K for 500 a year both replacement cost and 500 Deductible . But unless you can provide more information it would be VERY difficult to even attempt to tell you how much insurance should be . contact a local agent they should be able to compare rates for you . I would not suggest purchasing just online unless you are familiar with insurance you could be purchasing something and not be covered properly .
You can compare life insurance quotes by going to several different companies , or you can compare life insurance quotes by going to one website or agency that sells multiple companies . The advantage of doing your shopping in one place is that you will know you are comparing `` apples to apples '' . Life insurance has a dizzying amount of variables to consider , and every agent has their own idea as to what is important . When you compare quotes on a website quote engine , you are comparing the same plan against one another , although you still should visit with an agent to be sure that the one you select is one for which you actually qualify .
State Farm is a perfectly fine company with strong financial ratings . But , their Life Insurance is not what most agents would define as competitive . In fact , it often tends to be more expensive when compared to other companies . State Farm -LRB- and Allstate -RRB- often offer to discount your Home or Auto if you place your Life Insurance with them . On the surface it sounds like a great deal . But you need to actually compare the Home/Auto discount , to the difference in Premium for the more competitive Life Insurance Policy . Every time I have done this with a person , the lower priced Life Insurance Policy saves a lot more money than a discount other policies . Speak to an independent Agent who can compare multiple companies and show you the most competitive for your situation . Or visit a website such as the one on my profile and you can compare quotes yourself .
In order to effectively compare life insurance plans , you must compare `` apples to apples '' , as the saying goes . Comparing a 10 year Term premium to a 20 year Premium is not a valid comparison . You must compare 20 year Term to 20 year Term to know which has the best price . When comparing Permanent products , there are many more variables that enter into the price.Also , you must look at the guarantees , the riders , included features , and the predicted health rating of either Term or Permanent policies to make a valid comparison .
The cost of Medigap policies can vary widely . There can be big differences in premiums that insurance companies charge for exactly the same coverage . As you shop for a Medigap policy , be sure you are comparing the same Medigap policy -LRB- for example , compare a Plan A from one company with Plan A from another company -RRB- . Each insurance company sets its own premiums . It is important to ask how an insurance company prices Medigap policies . How they set the price affects how much you pay now and in the future .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
The best way to compare prices on Medigap policies is to speak with an independent Medigap insurance broker . Independent brokers can sell Medigap policies from just about every company that offers Medigap plans . Since all Medigap plans are standardized and the only difference is price , you can compare plan F 's from every company that offers it in your zip code to see which carrier will offer you the coverage at the lowest possible cost -LRB- same goes for comparing plan G 's , N 's , etc. -RRB- . I would also compare the prices of plan Fs and plan Gs because the benefits are identical except plan G has a deductible of $ 147 -LRB- the Medicare Part B deductible in 2014 and 2015 -RRB- . If the difference in price is more than $ 12.25 per month , plan G would be a better deal for you . If the difference in price is less than $ 12.25 per month , then plan F would be a better deal for you . I would be happy to help you with your Medigap coverage and compare Medigap plans and quotes from every company offering them to you in your area - our agency is licensed in over 35 states and over 50 insurance companies . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
No company can be the best because the best means different things to different people . To compare Medicare Advantage Plans make a chart of the following and compare several companies > Hospital co-pays , doctor co-pays , maximum out of pocket limit , monthly premium , check if your doctors are in network , check to see if your hospitals are in network , compare the surcharge if you go out of network , compare if the plans are HMO or PPO networks , etc. . Only you can decide the plan that is right for you . But an independent agent who specializes with Medicare Insurance can definitely help you sort out the facts .
Both answers above are correct . My first answer to `` How much does life insurance cost '' would be to ask , `` How much life insurance do you want or need ? '' The amount of benefit is a major factor in premiums for life insurance . Then the other factors such as age , health , tobacco use , gender are the other major factors . Then there 's the type of insurance : Whole Life , Term , Universal , etc. . When comparing Term policies the next biggest factor is the length of the term . And then there 's the insurance Company to consider . Different companies have different premiums for the same basic policy . Then there are `` riders '' that increase the benefits of the policy . Your best bet is to consult an Insurance Adviser who can broker several different companies and help you to compare .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To Cancel Travelers Renters Insurance ?
In order to cancel Travelers renters insurance policy you would either contact your Travelers agent or Travelers directly to notify them of your request to cancel your renters policy . Most likely you will be asked to provide a letter in writing that is dated and signed to process the cancellation request .
In order to cancel Travelers renters insurance policy you would either contact your Travelers agent or Travelers directly to notify them of your request to cancel your renters policy . Most likely you will be asked to provide a letter in writing that is dated and signed to process the cancellation request .
One of the insurance carriers I represent is Travelers and yes , you can purchase Renters insurance through Travelers . I would look for a local agent who can assist you in placing a renters policy if you are interested . I am sure the local agent would be happy to quote Travelers if they have access and other carries as well .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
There are many types of travel insurance plans from trip interruption due to an illness or emergency to medical or accidental death while traveling . Like any insurance policy it is a transference of risk . If you are taking a $ 10,000 family vacation and $ 8,000 is already paid as non refundable and if you had an emergency and had to cancel last minute and you would not miss the $ 8,000 , do n't buy insurance . However , if you or a family member were to become ill or injured in a foreign country , could you pay the tens of thousands of dollars it may cost for stabilization care and emergency medical transport . Most people could not . The cost of travel insurance for medical care and emergency evacuation or medical transport back home to the US is almost nothing compared to the risk of cost . My answer would be yes every time .
Most health insurance plans give some coverage overseas . The extent of the coverage in most cases is determined by looking at the event as life threatening.If that is the case , then emergency room visits would be covered.What is important for the traveler to know is that most doctors and hospitals in foreign countries want payment up front for services at the time of the visit . One instance I know of that happened to a traveler in Panama was a traveler went to the hospital and was required to pay $ 5,000 up front as a deposit before they would treat them . The traveler has to file claims after the fact and wait for a reimbursement . If you are covered by Medicaid or Medicare , there is no coverage outside the U.S. except Medicare will cover emergencies in Canada if they happen while en route to Alaska . When traveling outside the U.S. and on cruises the best course of action is to purchase a medical policy specifically for coverage overseas . These policies are very economical and offer an array of terms and choices . One of the most important services is to have a multilingual customer service agent who can help you locate medical services , deal with currency exchanges , manage claims and can co-ordinate services 24/7 . There are many companies that provide these insurance policies . I represent International Medical Group -LRB- IMG -RRB- who has many choices for nationals and foreign nationals that travel globally for business or pleasure . They have been in business for over twenty years and concentrate solely on this market . The United States Consular Bureau of Affairs also has a list of companies that provide these policies .
To determine the value of a travel insurance policy review the coverage that you currently have . Some people have coverage that extends to the locality where they live , or the state in which they reside . Coverage outside of that specified area can be highly limited . The issue becomes more severe with most plans when you travel overseas . If your current coverage is inadequate to cover potential difficulties secure a travel insurance policy . Personally , I travel overseas frequently and never purchase travel insurance .
Brenda Hanson 's answer is excellent in response to the one sentence question you posed . As she correctly suggested , you should send the cancellation request to both your agent and Travelers . It can be a simple `` Please cancel the following policy number , effective -LRB- date -RRB- . '' You do not have to give a reason . You should consider sending both notices by USPS Certified Mail and keep paper copies . Obviously you need to make sure that you have arranged for replacement coverage , to concur with your requested cancellation date . Your agent should be able to help you with all of this . You do not want a gap in coverage dates . Under any circumstances , make sure you are not without coverage , If you have a mortgage , you need continuous coverage . No gaps .
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
In my personal opinion Travelers home insurance is a superior product . Also Travelers has excellent customer service and claims handling . As an independent agent I work with many different companies and the one that rises to the top and receives praises from my clients continually is Travelers Insurance . Make sure to discuss the details with an agent as Travelers has several package options ranging from Silver to Platinum .
I am going to make a different assumption from Julie on this and go with a travel MEDICAL insurance plan vs. auto . Travel medical insurance is designed to supplement your major medical or Medicare plan when you travel outside the United States . Most major medical plans have worldwide coverage but there are some expenses that are not covered by major medical . These would include med evac , translation of medical records and return of mortal remains . Some Medicare Advantage plans have out of country coverage but if you have original Medicare your out of country coverage is limited . It would be wise to purchase an international travel medical plan .
Renters insurance covers the theft of things inside your vehicle , as that is personal property not car insurance . Renters insurance would not cover the car itself , that is car insurance . Also , renters insurance travels with you , so like on vacation or a cruise and some of your personal items are stolen .
Travelers Insurance Company covers standard Home Insurance Forms approved by each individual state in which theywrite homeowners insurance . Themost common form of Homeowners Insurance is the Form HO3 used to issue policies on Single Family Dwellings which are the primary residence of the titled owner . Travelers has a selection of endorsements which can be added to the policy inclusivebutnot exclusive of Replacement Cost Contents , Extended Dwelling Replacement , Water Backup , Liability Extension to Additional Residence , Personal Injury , Increased Limits for ValuableBelongings and many more ... . For Travelerscoverage in CA , AZ & NV , connect with : WEBSITELINK or call : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 For all other States , contact your local Travelers Insurance Agent forassistance .
Travelers is often used to describe Travelers Indemnity Company . That company does not offer life insurance . However , Travelers Life and Annuity is a company that used to sell Life Insurance , and was acquired by the MetLife Life and Annuity Company of Connecticut in 2005 .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- does not normally cover medical expenses while you are traveling overseas . Some Medicare Supplement plans can be used during overseas trips . There are also some instances where Medicare will cover foreign travel , e.g. travel through Canada on the way to Alaska .
You do n't have to worry about your life insurance being cancelled . A life insurance policy that was put into effect ethically will stay in effect whether you contract a life threatening disease , whether you travel to Syria , or whether you start to take drugs . No one would buy life insurance if the company had the option to cancel it on you whenever the risk changed in your life . However , you do have to keep your policy in effect through payment of the premiums -LRB- unless it is a paid up policy or using cash value to pay premiums , so that no more payments are needed -RRB- . If you get cancer and miss two payments of a term policy -LRB- and missing payments is very easy to do when people are hit with a serious illness -RRB- , you will not be getting that policy back by filling out reinstatement paperwork . So take extra care to let the insurance company know when you move or if you change banks so that your policy never lapses due to nonpayment .
Most health insurance plans , including major medical , supplemental health plans and Medicare do include coverage for individuals on a cruise . A cruise that is limited to the coastal United States and does not venture in to international waters is fine , but once you leave the states your coverage may have limits . Medicare beneficiaries with certain Medigap plans and traveling outside the United States have $ 50,000 of supplemental benefits . Some Medicare Advantage plans also include coverage outside the states Anyone traveling out of country should consider an international travel medical plan to supplement their regular health insurance -LRB- including Medicare -RRB- .
I not certain how having or not having automobile insurance would have an effect on renting a Uhaul trailer . If you are asking if your automobile insurance would extend to covering the rented Uhaul , the answer is maybe . Your automobile insurance liability coverage will typically travel with the insured not the vehicle , but comprehensive and collision coverage do not travel with the insured theyprovide coverage for thevehicle listed on the policy .
Most US based health insurance plans have out of country coverage . Keep in mind that provider network rules do not apply when traveling out of the country and in some cases you may be required to file your claim directly with the carrier so you can be reimbursed for your out of pocket expenses . When traveling outside of the US , even for a short time period , it is wise to consider international travel insurance to supplement your existing health plan . In addition to covering some of your deductible and other out of pocket expenses , a good international medical plan will cover things like med evac , return of mortal remains and translation of medical records . These items are almost never covered by traditional health insurance plans .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Term Life Insurance Have Cash Value ?
There are term policies that accumulate cash value . Most do not . Those that do accumulate cash value do so to provide an end of term cushion or incentive . The product with which I am most familiar uses the accumulated cash value to offset the steep increase in premiums for the years following completion of the term . This could be valuable if the insureds life expectancy is short and the need for insurance remains .
Yes , some do . Back in the olden days they were term policies in which dividends were paid . They date back almost to the days of the covered wagon and are probably just as rare :-RRB- Today we have term products with a return of premium feature . The idea is that if you outlive the term guarantee , you get all your premium back . Of course , you have to pay a lot more premium for this added benefit . Is it worth it ? It all depends on your ability to save on the side and reimburse yourself from your own fund . But it also depends on your philosophy regarding life insurance . Ive always maintained that cash value is secondary in life insurance . The primary value of this product is the survivor benefit . The exact amount of money your heirs need is provided exactly when they need it . And every dollar of that benefit costs pennies in premium . It is quite a deal . If on top of that , do you want to grow some cash on a tax-favored basis , go for it . But just make sure that the survivor benefit remains intact .
No , term life is pure insurance . I compare it to renting an apartment . You live there but you have no equity . Term is good for a young family with a large insurance need . It can help pay a mortgage or other debts if you die prematurely . Term insurance is generally lower priced than whole life , initially , but when you look at the costs over time a whole life policy is far less expensive and will be available when you are likely to need it most . I always recommend a combination of whole life and term depending on the needs of my clients .
I would recommend a Term policy with a return of premium provision -LRB- ROP -RRB- if you wish to accumulate a cash surrender value . In most cases you are not allowed to borrow against the reserve , rather it is refunded to you when you surrender your policy based on the provisions in your policy
Some term life insurance plans do accumulate a residual value but not in the traditional sense of a `` whole life '' or permanent form of life insurance . Term life insurance plans that have a return of premium provision -LRB- ROP -RRB- accumulate cash surrender value . You are usually not allowed to borrow against the reserve , but it is refunded to you at policy surrender according to the provisions in your policy .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Extended term life insurance is coverage that is provided by the cash value in a life insurance policy . The policy is usually a whole life policy , but can originate from other cash value plans . Here is an example : You have a $ 100,000 whole life policy that has built up some cash value . You stop paying premiums and your non-forfeiture option is extended term . The cash value is used to provide you with $ 100,000 of coverage for a specified term based on the cash value . This is referred to as extended term . Some insurance companies have extended term as the default non-forfeiture option for cash value plan whole life plans when you miss a premium others have automatic premium loan . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Unfortunately , you can not borrow from a term life insurance policy because term life insurance does not have any cash value from which to borrow . Cash value is only present in permanent policies -LRB- Whole Life , Universal Life , and their variations -RRB- . Not all permanent policies have enough cash value to tap into until they have been in effect for some time , and some -LRB- e.g. guaranteed universal life -RRB- may never have much cash value . If you want a policy with cash value that you can borrow from in the future , most permanent policies will have an illustration that you can review before you purchase it , so you can see who much cash value will be available .
There are two main types of life insurance . The first is term life insurance which has no cash value . Think of it as renting . The second type of life insurance is cash value life insurance . The most popular go by names like , whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . All of which have cash value that builds with time . If you have one of these types of plans , look for the pages marked `` illustrations '' . You will find a cash value column explaining how much cash is built up in a given year . Most policies allow you to take a `` cash loan '' against them and keep your coverage in force . You may also cash out completely or roll the cash value to another plan . You will find the average policy will not have cash value until coverage has been in force for about 5 years .
Your life insurance value depends on which life insurance you purchased . If you own a term policy is has no cash value , but it does have a death benefit to your named beneficiary upon your death and your coverage is still in force . If you purchased a cash value permanent policy it has a death benefit the same as the term policy but also a cash value . First look at the type of policy term , whole , universal , mortgage , etc. . If it is a cash value plan , look inside the policy for the illustrations pages within the first 10 or 12 pages . There will be a corresponding value based on the year the policy is in force . Most cash value policies do require payments of up to 7 years before a cash value is established to purchase the death benefit .
There are several reasons . With cash value life insurance such as whole life , you do not have to worry about prmiums going up as you get older and most likely to need the insurance . The cash value can help provide a buffer if your financial situation changes . Every whole life policy as nonforfiture options in the contract . The cash value can help conserve a poliy utilizing thes options . If you can not afford the premiums any longer the cash value can be used to buy a reduced paid up policy according to a schedule in your policy . You can also stop making payments and the policy will continue in-force with the cash value buying extended term insurance until the cash value is used up . You can cash surrender the policy and get some equity . When you deduct the cash value of a policy from the total premiums you pay you will see that in the long run cash value insurance was far less expensive than buing term . You can also take a loan on your cash value that is very interest friendly and will have no repayment schedule , although it is always best to at least pay the interest since the amount of the loan would be deducted from the face amount when you die .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
Whole Life has set premiums that never go up , guaranteed cash values , and will be around when you need it as long as you pay the premiums . It also has what is called non-forfeiture values . If you stop making payments and the policy has cash value you can : 1 . Let the policy go on extended term which will provide the full face amount for a period until the cash value runs out . 2 . Take a reduced paid up policy for whatever the cash value will buy . 3 . Cash the policy in . Universal Life has Flexible Premiums , you can change the amount you put into the plan . Flexible Death Benefit , you can change the death benefit , reducing it or if your health is good increase the benefit without having to purchase a new policy . Universal Life has a guaranteed interest rate , not guaranteed cash value . Since the premiums are flexible the danger is in under funding the policy which will make the policy lapse , even if you are making premium payments . Universal Life is basically term insurance with a cash value side fund combined into one package . If there is not enough cash in the policy side fund to pay for the term insurance the policy lapses . It is important to make sure you are properly funding the Universal Life policy by paying at least the Target Premium . Each year you will receive an annual statement showing the cost of the term insurance and the amount of cash in the policy . Have your agent review this with you at least every two years to make sure it is performing as planned . As you can see , while the Universal Life has some attractive features , Whole Life is a safer more stable product .
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
Life insurance that has a cash value can be cashed in . When it is cashed in , the policy ends . There are some other options , such as borrowing from the cash value , that could be considered if you want to keep your policy in effect . Term life insurance does not have a cash value , and some permanent policies do not have more than a negligible cash value for years , or never generate much cash value . Those type of policies could be stopped , but could not be technically cashed in because there would be no cash to collect .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is Renters Insurance Good For ?
Having renters insurance can help protect the insured and the insured 's immediate family residing in the covered premise from financial hardship caused by a covered loss . What happens if there is a fire in the premise that you are renting and it becomes unlivable . You have not only lost your personal property but you also need to find another place to live . Typically renters insurance will provide coverage for your personal items up to the policy limits less your deductible and money to pay rent for a period of time at another residence . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
Good renters insurance pays a claim to the greatest extent possible and makes you whole when you suffer a loss . This is true whether it is loss due to fire , or loss due to lawsuit . Good renters insurance also meets the requirements of your landlord . The place to buy good renters insurance is from a trusted insurance agent . This agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Premium is a secondary consideration .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
Yes , a landlord can require a tenant to purchase renters insurance . Landlords are responsible for insurance that covers the dwelling , but renters are responsible for their belongings.Renters can also be held liable for any injuries that happen in the dwelling , which would be covered by the renters insurance . Since renters insurance is so inexpensive , it 's always a good idea to have renters insurance , rather than risk losing everything .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Guaranteed Cash Value For Life Insurance ?
The guaranteed cash value in a life insurance policy is a byproduct of levelized premium . The risk of dying increases as you get older and when you pay a level premium the insurance company sets aside some of the premium to offset the risk as you get older . The guaranteed cash value is this reserve . If you have further questions please do not hesitate to contact me .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Yes . Whole life is a permanent life insurance . The premium and the death benefit can be guaranteed for your entire lifetime . So can the cash value . This makes the product an extremely competitive cash accumulation vehicle for the conservative part of your portfolio . And why would you want the premium and the death benefit to be permanently guaranteed ? Well , imagine yourself buying term insurance and then outliving the policy . Now you need to buy another one . And youre older , so the price is automatically higher . And what if you unfortunately have a serious medical condition ? The price could be even higher . Worse , you may not qualify for coverage at all ! Permanent insurance means you permanently dont have to worry about qualifying for coverage . Whole life does that very well . But remember this : these guarantees come at a big cost . Especially the guaranteed cash value . What if you like the idea of permanent guarantees , but want to spend less on the coverage ? You do have an option : guaranteed universal life insurance . You can get the premium and the death benefit guaranteed for your lifetime at least until age 121 :-RRB- . You just wont have any cash guaranteed to grow inside the policy . Guaranteed universal life is also permanent insurance . Its a cheaper version of whole life , without the cash . Kind of like permanent term insurance .
Whole Life has set premiums that never go up , guaranteed cash values , and will be around when you need it as long as you pay the premiums . It also has what is called non-forfeiture values . If you stop making payments and the policy has cash value you can : 1 . Let the policy go on extended term which will provide the full face amount for a period until the cash value runs out . 2 . Take a reduced paid up policy for whatever the cash value will buy . 3 . Cash the policy in . Universal Life has Flexible Premiums , you can change the amount you put into the plan . Flexible Death Benefit , you can change the death benefit , reducing it or if your health is good increase the benefit without having to purchase a new policy . Universal Life has a guaranteed interest rate , not guaranteed cash value . Since the premiums are flexible the danger is in under funding the policy which will make the policy lapse , even if you are making premium payments . Universal Life is basically term insurance with a cash value side fund combined into one package . If there is not enough cash in the policy side fund to pay for the term insurance the policy lapses . It is important to make sure you are properly funding the Universal Life policy by paying at least the Target Premium . Each year you will receive an annual statement showing the cost of the term insurance and the amount of cash in the policy . Have your agent review this with you at least every two years to make sure it is performing as planned . As you can see , while the Universal Life has some attractive features , Whole Life is a safer more stable product .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
No . The guaranteed side simply means the coverage is guaranteed to remain in effect until that point as long as the premiums are continued to be paid at their current rate - as universal life insurance is defined as flexible premium coverage , you have the option to increase the premium you 're paying to extend the guarantee side . The current side determines when the coverage would actually run out - however , the current side is always subject to change as it reflects whatever the current interest rates are . If the interest rates change , then the current side will change as well . In addition , if the carrier raises their costs of insurance charges under the policy , then the cash value can be depleted even faster thus lowering the current side coverage projection even further . If you 're unsure what you have , you can contact the carrier to send you an up-to-date illustration -LRB- a coverage projection citing how long the coverage will remain in force based on today 's figures -RRB- . It sounds to me as though the policy that you have is a current assumption universal life program rather than a guaranteed universal life program -LRB- which can guarantee premiums remain fixed and guaranteed up to age 121 -RRB- . Current assumption policies typically have limited guarantees under their programs and require additional premiums if the cash value is depleted - meaning they will `` crash '' if the cash value hits $ 0 -LRB- you would therefore need to pay more in premiums above what you 're already spending to keep the coverage going or else it will lapse -RRB- . Guaranteed universal life policies state that even if the cash value hits $ 0 , the coverage will still continue as long as your regularly scheduled premiums are paid . If you prefer to have something that guarantees coverage for life rather than risking coverage lapsing after age 75 , you may want to consider setting up a guaranteed universal life policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a word - No . Globe life insurance is Term insurance , which has no cash value . Since it has no cash value there is nothing to borrow against . Only with ` Permanent ' types of insurance such as Whole Life and the various Universal Life policies is there value associated against which one may borrow . And I always caution people about `` Universal '' life policies , because they can and often do run out of cash value and even expire before the owner is aware of what happened . Whole Life is the only truly permanent life insurance and the premiums never increase . And you know in advance what the guaranteed cash value will be at any future date . And the cash value may be much more than the guaranteed value .
To clarify the question : what life insurance can build cash value ? Generally , there are four types of cash value products that could generate accumulating cash values : Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Variable Universal life and Participating Whole Life Insurance . The performance of interest rates , indices and market equities may or may not credit any earnings and life insurance has policy expenses . Each policy owner must assess their risk tolerance for each type of life insurance contract . Participating whole life insurance base policies have guaranteed cash values . Lastly , a few guaranteed universal life insurance policies have some cash values in the later years , but should not be considered as a cash accumulation vehicle .
All the answers above are valid . Term insurance Never has `` cash value '' , but you may be able to buy a `` Return of Premium '' rider with a Term policy that will return most of the premium paid at the termination of the policy . And that without interest . Universal policies may accumulate some cash value after the first several years , but unless the amount of premium is increased to keep pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' that cash value will be consumed and the policy lapse with no value at all . Whole Life policies have a guaranteed minimum interest paid into a cash value of the policy and this interest is compounded and grows tax-free . You have access to the cash value also tax-free . You may also use the cash value as a future income source for retirement . The best Cash Value policies are the Participating Whole Life policies with Mutual companies . These are eligible for Dividends on top of the guaranteed interest and will grow the cash value much faster .
Yes . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Some Universal Life policies are designed to have very little or no cash value . Called Guaranteed Universal Life , these policies are designed to not lapse even if the cash value goes to zero due to a secondary guarantee of the death benefit for periods up to lifetime .
Could be . Just make sure you know what youre gaining , and what youre losing . What if you sell it , and then need coverage again ? Would you be eligible , considering your medical condition and lifestyle ? Of course , you do understand the price would be higher simply because youre older than when you had taken out that policy originally . What about the cash value of the policy ? That might be higher than the selling price . Think about that . Do your research . Also remember that with whole life insurance , you would be parting with a product that gives just about the best guarantees around . Guaranteed premium . Guaranteed death benefit . And guaranteed cash value . Take a quick survey of the marketplace and see if any of other product gives you a better rate of return on the guaranteed cash . Having said all this , if you are dead set on selling the policy , you have to find a good settlement company with whom to do business . They are a dime a dozen . Get a referral to some good ones . Interview them . Let them compete for your business . What is the most one would pay ? You should know that they will underwrite you . Your age and medical condition are key . They will not take all comers . Older , and frankly sicker , insureds are their preference . You may not even be eligible . If that is the case , look again at your life insurance options . You might be able to get better value from a guaranteed universal life product . Would you like to keep learning ? Check my blog : planrisklive.com .
They are different forms of permanent insurance . In order for a policy to be permanent , that is last the entire lifetime of the insured it must develop cash value . A whole life policy guarantees cash value in the policy . A universal life policy doesnt guarantee cash values . It is possible for a universal life policy to exhaust its cash values rendering the policy worthless . The universal life policy invests in a separate fund that is generally managed in a more aggressive manner than the guaranteed whole life cash value fund .
Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message if you need assistance with your program .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Whole life insurance has a specified premium that never goes up , a specified death benefit that will not expire unless the policy lapses or you die or surrender the policy , and guaranteed cash value build up . Universal life has flexible premiums , you can vary the amount you put into the plan . It has a flexible death benefit , you can decrease the amount of insurance or increase the amount of insurance without having to take out a new policy . Because the premiums are flexible there is no guaranteed cash value . Most will have a guaranteed interest rate on any cash value . The danger with a Universal Life is under funding the contract . Because you are not locked into a set premium and there is an interest component that is not guaranteed , if the insured fails to put enough in the contract and the cost of insurance becomes greater than the cash value the policy will expire . It is important to make sure you properly fund your Universal life . Whole life has better guarantees than Universal life and less risk .
Heres a simple model for you . I am sure you know about term insurance . This is a product designed to give you the absolutely lowest premium for a certain amount of time . The premium and death benefit could be guaranteed from 10 to 30 years . No cash will be accumulated for your use . -LRB- Of course , that is one big reason why the premium is so low -RRB- . The problem we all face with term insurance is that once the guarantee period is over , the price typically skyrockets . I have actually see the premium increase tenfold at the time of renewal ! Now lets suppose that you could have something that would act like permanent term insurance . The premium would be as low as can possibly be . No cash would be accumulated . But the price would never go up . You would have , in essence , a lifetime guarantee . That , my friend , is called guaranteed universal life insurance . Whole life insurance is very similar . Guaranteed premium . Guaranteed death benefit . Lifelong coverage . The big difference is that whole life insurance also emphasizes cash accumulation . It provides very strong guarantees on the cash . So it costs a lot more than guaranteed universal life insurance . It should be noted that providing a lifetime guarantee is only one of a variety of uses for universal life insurance . It is a flexible product and can be designed to accumulate cash as well . It can also be designed to accommodate a variety of premium payments . But when the financial planning objective is to secure a lifetime coverage at the lowest possible guaranteed cost , there is no better product .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Who Has The Best Health Insurance In Ohio ?
The best health insurance in Ohio is typically provided by one of the major companies in the state . These carriers are Anthem Blue Cross , UnitedHealthcare , Aetna , Medical Mutual or Humana . SummaCare offers policies in the Northern portion of the state . Healthspan -LRB- formerly Kaiser -RRB- is also available on the Exchanges . So how do you get the best health insurance prices in Ohio ? Perhaps I 'm a bit biased , since I 'm an experienced broker located here in Ohio with one of the premier websites . www.ohioquotes.com will help you easily enroll and find the best rates on the Exchange Marketplace . Of course , the key to getting the best rates from top companies is to have an expert shop and compare for you , help with calculating your federal subsidy -LRB- if you qualify -RRB- and helping with enrollment to the Ohio Health Exchange . Healthcare has significantly changed in the last few years with the passage of The Affordable Care Act . Policies are different and benefits have been revamped . It 's worth your time to utilize a broker to help you properly calculate the federal subsidy and determine the best available plans .
The best health insurance in Ohio is typically provided by one of the major companies in the state . These carriers are Anthem Blue Cross , UnitedHealthcare , Aetna , Medical Mutual or Humana . SummaCare offers policies in the Northern portion of the state . Healthspan -LRB- formerly Kaiser -RRB- is also available on the Exchanges . So how do you get the best health insurance prices in Ohio ? Perhaps I 'm a bit biased , since I 'm an experienced broker located here in Ohio with one of the premier websites . www.ohioquotes.com will help you easily enroll and find the best rates on the Exchange Marketplace . Of course , the key to getting the best rates from top companies is to have an expert shop and compare for you , help with calculating your federal subsidy -LRB- if you qualify -RRB- and helping with enrollment to the Ohio Health Exchange . Healthcare has significantly changed in the last few years with the passage of The Affordable Care Act . Policies are different and benefits have been revamped . It 's worth your time to utilize a broker to help you properly calculate the federal subsidy and determine the best available plans .
As an experienced Ohio broker -LRB- 32 years of experience -RRB- , I 'll answer the question . No . That was simple ! You are not required to purchase life insurance in Ohio . For additional information regarding Ohio life insurance prices , consult an experienced broker who lives in Ohio and who is a FULL-TIME agent as opposed to a consultant , navigator or any other part-time position . An experienced agent/broker will shop the major carriers for you and provide expert advice in the state they are most familiar with ... Ohio !
Health insurance for one person in Ohio can cost as little as $ 30 per month , depending on your age , zip code and the type of plan you are purchasing . A temporary policy will be the cheapest type of medical coverage . Recent legislation -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- has created the Ohio Health Exchange , that includes a federal subsidy that could substantially reduce your premium . But how do you get these low rates ? As an experienced broker here in Ohio -LRB- just North of Cincinnati -RRB- we utilize our experience -LRB- 32 years in the business -RRB- along with our top-rated websites to find the best options for consumers . Your monthly premium may be as low as $ 30 or quite a bit higher . The most important thing is to ensure that your existing conditions are covered and the most cost-effective policy is elected , so you pay the lowest premium for the maximum amount of benefits .
The best life insurance in Ohio depends on what you are looking for . If you are looking for the rating of the company , then New York Life , Northwestern Mutual , and TIAA-CREF had top ratings from all the main rating agencies in 2012 . However , there are many companies that are just a rating or two off from those and still are outstanding companies . If you are looking for the best features , there are many companies that have guaranteed death benefit at a guaranteed price , conversion options , and a variety of riders from which to choose . If you are looking for the best price , that depends on your age , sex , tobacco status , health , face amount , type of policy , and other risk factors . Contact a website or agency that sells life insurance in Ohio to get your best life insurance rate .
You can easily purchase Ohio car insurance online at affordable rates . Fortunately , prices in the Buckeye state are quite low compared to most other ares . Recently , a national study concluded that our prices were among the lowest in the US . And they are ! We put our name on our website as we are located here in Ohio . Although located just North of Kings Island , we serve the entire state . Our address and phone number are easily available . There are many reputable websites . As an experienced Ohio broker with more than 32 years of experience , I endorse Ohiocarinsurancerates.com . Articles are current and regularly updated and your free quotes will allow you to find the lowest available prices from the top-rated carriers . But as previously mentioned , there are other reputable national websites . Naturally , your rate will depend on many factors , including -LRB- but not limited to -RRB- your age , zip code and driving record . Rates , for example , in the Cincinnati area will be different than the cost in Toledo or Akron . The Columbus area -LRB- and Central Ohio -RRB- does typically feature some of the most competitive options in the state .
Pre-existing health insurance in Ohio is now available at prices lower than ever before . Thanks to the Affordable Care Act , you can not be denied because of medical issues and your pre-existing conditions are covered without any waiting period or surcharges . You need to apply for coverage through the Ohio Health Insurance Exchange -LRB- also known as the `` Marketplace . '' A new federal tax subsidy will drastically reduce your premiums if you qualify . OK . How do you compare rates and enroll ? Visit the premier trusted resource in the state for Ohio healthcare coverage , which is Ohioquotes.com . Within a few minutes , you can view options and easily apply . An experienced local broker -LRB- 33 years of experience -RRB- is always available . The most popular companies are Anthem Blue Cross , Medical Mutual , Humana and Healthspan . If your need is short-term , a UnitedHealthcare temporary plan may be the best option . Open Enrollment is going on right now so you can visit the website and shop , compare , apply and save . When Open Enrollment ends , there are non-Exchange options that will be available .
Fortunately , Ohio features some of the least expensive health insurance rates in the US . The major carriers in the state are Anthem Blue Cross , UnitedHealthcare -LRB- Golden Rule -RRB- , Medical Mutual , Aetna and Humana . Assurant and Celtic also offer coverage although their prices are not always competitive . SummaCare , Kaiser and HealthAmerica offer plans in portions of Northern Ohio . Reputable websites and/or experienced brokers can often offer policies to consumers . Typically , individual , family and small-business plans are available . Of course , in 2014 , policies can be purchased -LRB- with help from a broker , if needed -RRB- through the Ohio Health Exchange , a `` marketplace '' created from `` The Affordable Care Act . '' Federal tax subsidies will be available to those persons that qualify .
Medicare Part A and Part B is provided by the Social Security Administration for every state , including Ohio . To apply for Medicare in Ohio , you can call the Social Security Administration at 800-663-4227 -LRB- 800-MEDICARE -RRB- . If you are looking for Medicare Supplemental Insurance , there are a number of companies that sell this type of coverage in Ohio . You may be able to get a quote through your own health insurance provider .
Getting life insurance online in Ohio can save you time , money and frustration . Purchasing a policy through an Ohio broker and their website will allow you to shop and compare the top-rated companies and their policies . As an Ohio broker for more than 32 years , we 're aware of which carrier offer the best rates and what types of plans are the most appropriate for your situation . We 're `` in your community '' and share the same goals and dreams you do . The combination of a top-rated website and three decades of local experience is tough to beat ! Term and permanent coverage is available that is suitable for the vast majority of people that apply . For persons with serious medical conditions , there are companies that specialize in non-standard risks and often the prices are extremely affordable . `` No physical '' policies are also available from many of the top carriers .
Auto insurance is mandatory here in Ohio . As an Ohio broker since 1980 -LRB- Has it been that long ? -RRB- , we help consumers meet the mandatory minimum liability requirement in the most affordable way . By shopping multiple companies , consumers can view and compare the lowest rates . Also , keep in mind that it is always a good idea to consider liability limits higher than what is legally required . Although youthful rates can be a bit expensive , as you get older , rates typically reduce quite a bit . This is an ideal time to review your existing coverage . Ironically , the Ohio state minimum limits were recently increased from $ 12,500 / $ 25,000 to $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . It had been quite a while since the limits were increased .
To get life insurance online in Ohio , go to a website that shows instant quotes and see if a quote comes up for Ohio . Once you have a policy in mind , either call or email the online website so that you can cover all the health questions to be sure you qualify for the one you chose , or to find a better option for you . The online agency in Ohio will guide you on how to apply and put the policy in effect . You can do it all without ever meeting with an agent .
The minimum Ohio car insurance liability limits are $ 12,500 per person , $ 25,000 per accident and $ 7,500 of property damage . These limits will increase by the end of 2013 . How much car insurance coverage should you carry ? If possible , amounts above the minimum required limits , since they are simply a low benchmark set for compliance . As an experienced Ohio car insurance broker since 1980 , our job is to help consumers find the lowest auto insurance prices from the major companies such as State Farm , Allstate , Progressive , Geico , Esurance , Liberty Mutual and many others . We do the shopping so our customers can save ! By utilizing a local experienced Ohio broker , you 'll save time , money and yes ... a lot of frustration !
The average monthly cost of health insurance depends on many variables . Among the biggest factors influencing your rate are your age , where you reside -LRB- state and zip code -RRB- , your smoking status , what health conditions you have , and the type of benefits your policy will offer . For example , a single healthy young person in Ohio could pay as little as $ 25 per month for a short-term plan , since prices for health insurance in Ohio are very affordable . Conversely , New Jersey medical coverage prices will be substantially higher , as will most other states . Allow an experienced broker help you shop and compare . Our websites also are typically very helpful to consumers shopping for healthcare coverage .
Health insurance in Ohio is available through a number of different sources . An experienced broker and their website are a great way to obtain free quotes -LRB- online or phone -RRB- and apply for affordable coverage . The Ohio State Health Exchange will offer Open Enrollment in October of 2013 for 2014 effective dates . Pre-existing conditions will be covered and a federal subsidy will be available to persons that qualify .
Life insurance rates in Ohio are very affordable . Since most major carriers publish `` national '' rates and not `` statewide '' rates , you may not see a big variance -LRB- if any -RRB- of prices from one state to another . Life insurance prices -LRB- especially term -RRB- do vary greatly though , from one carrier to another . As an Ohio broker -LRB- for 32 years -RRB- , specializing in life/health insurance , our job is to shop hundreds of companies for you , find the plans that best meet your specific needs at the lowest possible cost , and simplify the underwriting process . And that 's exactly what a good experienced broker with a reputable website does !
When a licensed driver operates the insured car you own you are insuring the damage or injuries they cause in most places in this country . Insurance follows the car in Ohio . The driver has the financial responsibility for the injuries or damage in Ohio too if the car is not insured . The unfortunate answer is that permissive use by non-rated drivers is something insurance companies hate paying for and would love to avoid . It is something to ponder before loaning out your car because if it happens to you you wo n't be happy having the loss tagged to your record . I suggest you check with an agent in your state of domicile for the most accurate answer .
Auto insurance in Ohio is actually fairly inexpensive ... if you know where to look . As an experienced broker here in Ohio -LRB- just North of Cincinnati -RRB- , we specialize in finding the lowest available rates offered by the top-rated carriers . Prices are based on many factors including your age , where you live , the type of vehicle you drive and how good -LRB- or bad ! -RRB- your driving record is . Typically , rates here in the Buckeye state are lower than most other states . A younger driver -LRB- under 21 -RRB- will usually pay a higher rate . There are , however , many discounts that can help reduce the premium . Each carrier has a different set of discounts so shopping can make a big difference . Also , by having an experienced broker shop for you , you may be able to find better pricing . Whether its State Farm , Esurance , Progressive , Geico or Farmers -LRB- or many others -RRB- , as experienced brokers with top-rated websites , our job is to help consumers find not only the best prices , but the most appropriate coverage for their specific circumstances .
The cost of life insurance in Ohio varies according to the age , health , and tobacco status of the applicant , as well as the type of policy being purchased . Generally , the older the age of the applicant , the higher the premium ; and the longer the premium is locked in , the higher the price . To find the most affordable life insurance rate for you , go to a website that carries life insurance in Ohio and use the quote engine provided to compare quotes for different types of policies .
The State of Ohio does not require Ohio residents to purchase life insurance . They also do not require employers to provide life insurance . Life insurance is still a voluntary purchase in every state , and you are free to purchase the amount and type of policy you want , and that fits your budget .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does My Father Have Life Insurance ?
That 's a hard question to answer . I would recommend you review any old paperwork he has on file . Look for any bank drafts with various companies on his bank statement . Also consider calling his home/auto insurance provider and see if they knew of any policies in force . There is no centralized database of people with life insurance . This is a great reason why you want to have folder will all your policies and info for those you leave behind .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
Yes , you can take out a life insurance on your father if your father consents to it and if the amount is considered financially justifiable . Your father will need to sign the application as the Insured even if you own the policy . If he owns the policy , he can get as much life insurance as his income supports . If you own the policy , you can get as much as is needed for his final expenses . If you want to purchase more than that on your father , you will most likely need to show that you receive some financial support from your father that would be lost if he were to pass , or that you contribute to his support and would get some of that back through life insurance .
A person can usually get life insurance on their child 's father . Sometimes a court will even order the father to carry life insurance so that their child is provided for if the father should pass away , and his child support end . Whether or not your child 's father pays child support and/or has visitation rights may enter into the underwriter 's decision as to how much life insurance you can purchase on him . Shopping among a number of companies should find you one that will provide you with the amount you desire .
No , you ca n't get life insurance on your dad without his consent . If you are trying to secure some funding for final expenses when your father passes away , here are some tips that might help him consent to your purchasing coverage on him . 1 -RRB- Tell him you love him , and what a good provider he has been for your family . 2 -RRB- Maybe bring up a situation that caused you to think of buying life insurance for him . E.g. . When a friend or uncle died . And how it got you to thinking about what you would do if your father died . 3 -RRB- Explain that life insurance pays a death benefit quickly , without going through probate . This allows survivors to pay bills quickly and focus on supporting one another , rather than worrying about how to pay the bill . 4 -RRB- Use a simplified or guaranteed issue policy that does not ask a lot of health questions and does not need an exam . If you use a policy that pays the death benefit from day one , you will need to get your father 's health history . If guaranteed issue policy , it will be graded , but he can not be declined . 5 -RRB- Make sure he understands what will be required , be that a phone interview , drafting from his checking account -LRB- unless you are paying the premium -RRB- , etc. . With guaranteed issue policies , nothing is required but his signature on the application .
Those who need the greatest amount of life insurance are those who would have the greatest losses , numerically speaking , if they passed . Persons with very high incomes would need a very high amount of life insurance to replace their income in the event of their deaths . Owners of a highly valued business could purchase a very large policy to buy out the share of another owner who passes . A son could take out life insurance on his father so that he is able to purchase his father 's ranch when his father passes . Of course , needing a great amount of life insurance does not make the need any more important than for those who need lesser amounts . Sometimes $ 10,000 can mean as much to one beneficiary as $ 1,000,000 can mean to another .
The first step in taking out a life insurance policy on your father would be to talk it over with him . That shows respect , can avoid hard feelings , and also helps ensure that he will not back out at some point in the process . Most children only need a small policy on their parents , and you should be able to easily find him a small policy that does not require an exam . However , if you are taking out a policy on your father that requires a large face amount -LRB- e.g. so that you can buy out his share of his business when he dies -RRB- and that will entail an exam . Ask him ahead of time if he is OK with taking the exam . Get a list of his medications , what health conditions he has had , and his height and weight , then shop for the best rate . If you do not have all that information , you may end up putting your father through a discouraging decline that could have been avoided . With this arsenal of information , you can find his best price and make it into a more satisfying exercise for both of you .
One of the big advantages of life insurance is that it does not have to go through probate . My father died about a year ago , and he had several small life insurance policies . My mom was truly surprised that she had quick access to those funds to pay for Dad 's funeral , without having to wait for probate -LRB- which still has not been completed , as far as I know -RRB- . And surprised again when she just found out for sure that she did not have to pay any taxes on them . No matter how much you trust your agent , it is collecting on life insurance that can make believers of anyone .
Rich people may buy life insurance for many reasons . Here are some : 1 . Business succession . E.g. . A son getting a life insurance policy on his father could enable him to buy the business when his father passes . 2 . Taxes . Life insurance can be purchased to pay taxes and/or to avoid having to pay some taxes . 3 . Charity . Leaving life insurance to a charity maximizes the donation and allows the donor to not have to pay it in a lump sum . 4 . Tax deferred retirement income . Indexed Universal Life is a great tool for this . 5 . Almost unlimited contributions . Life insurance and annuities do not have the caps that some investments have .
Whenever you want to get a Life Insurance policy on another adult , such as your father , all you need to do is fill out the application . What you will need to know is who the owner will be ? Is that going to be your father or you ? Who is paying the premiums ? What is the purpose of the insurance ? Your father will have to sign the application as the applicant/insured . You CAN NOT sign it for him . Be sure to have all the facts straight regarding his medical history as well . Last , I highly recommend working with a broker to help you through this process which will get the application through underwriting that much faster .
Jim 's advice is spot-on here . The question and issue is so important that you should pay an attorney to advise you , especially given that 50 % of the policy 's proceeds might be at stake for you . You also mentioned in your question that your father passed away and that you were the `` insured . '' I think you are the beneficiary and he was the insured . So that check that out with the attorney as well and make sure to get sound legal advice before your turn in your father 's death certificate , so that there are no surprises . The life insurance company can also tell you if your father maintained sole ownership or if he ever added another owner .
As Larry mentioned , not every 25 year old is the same . At 25 , I was married and was a father of my first -LRB- of two -RRB- children . I owned a home , had responsibilities I felt needed protection from my early death . Life insurance for me , at 25 was a wise choice to make . That said , at 19 I also had life insurance . Not as much as at 25 , but enough to make sure if something happened , my parents would n't have to have a financial loss to go along with the loss of their son . It is said that single people do n't need life insurance , but I think very few people are truly single . Someone has to take care of things when you pass . How difficult you want to make an already difficult situation is up to you .
Both Michael and Dan have provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As both Gentleman have indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a term within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
I feel like the poster child for this question with my father recently passing away at age 84 with 5 small , obscure , life insurance policies for which my mom just got paid . One was taken out when he was 16 years old from a company that we never heard of . I entered the name of the original company in a search engine and quickly found the name of the company now in charge of the policy . Our funeral director tracked it down . If you have the name of the company , you will find the money . If you do not have the policy number or do not know whether the deceased person even had life insurance , you can start by digging in their records and talking to relatives to see if the deceased person mentioned any to them . I have had calls from people who found my email on their relatives ' computers , asking if their loved ones had responded to the quotes I had given them . If all fails , life insurance that goes unclaimed can end up in the files of the state where it was purchased , after a few years . Check out this website for more information : WEBSITELINK
Mr. Erickson has provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As Mr. Erickson has indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a requirement within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
My father passed away this February and my mom got the benefits from his policies a few weeks after submitting the death claims . Getting the certified death certificate to submit with the death claim actually took about as long as getting the life insurance payments did . One of these policies was taken out in 1945 . Life insurance is an amazing thing .
To find out if your deceased father had life insurance , start by looking through his files . He should have a copy of the life insurance policy , or some evidence that he purchased one . If not , ask relatives or friends if they recall him ever talk about buying life insurance . Check with local financial agencies to see if they sold him one . If you know his favorite life insurance companies , you can call them to ask if there was any policy taken out on your father . Finally , if all else fails , keep any eye out for unclaimed property a few years down the road .
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
Long Term Care Insurance is a good purchase if there is a risk of needing nursing home , assisted living , or home health care in your future . My father waited too long to get long term care insurance , and no longer qualified for it . It would have been nice to have that extra income to help my mom care for him . There are so many ways that people can be laid up , and hospitals are reluctant to allow people to stay too long . So long term care insurance can be a very good purchase for helping those who need the care , and for those who give it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Happens When You Cancel A Life Insurance Policy ?
When you cancel a life insurance policy , you no longer have life insurance . If you have a permanent policy and cancel the policy during the first years of the policy , a surrender charge will be deducted from the cash value you receive , and you most likely will not receive any cash value at all . However , you will not owe money to pay the surrender charge . Term life insurance does not have any surrender charges because there is no cash value .
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
I ca n't imagine why you would want to just cancel your Whole Life insurance policy ! You know that you have the option of replacing your current policy with another policy and have all the value of the current policy transferred to the new policy ? However as you asked what happens when you cancel a whole life policy - what happens is you no longer have the insurance . If the policy has grown sufficient cash value to cover the surrender fees and have an excess , you should be able to receive the remaining cash value at the time of cancellation . You really should talk with a qualified Insurance Adviser and find out what your options are and then decide how to proceed .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
It depends on the exact type of term policy you have as to what happens when a term life policy ends . One way is the policy will just cancel and you will need to purchase another plan if you still have a need for life insurance . The second and more common term life policy will not cancel but the premiums will increase sharply , usually 8 to 10 times in order to get you to cancel the coverage and be underwritten again .
What happens when you cancel life insurance ? You end your coverage on the date you provide . Any cash values or unused premium in your policy will be returned to you . With term insurance any unused premium will be refunded . Cancelation should be done in writing as cancelation often requires a signed document .
Yes . Most insurance policies will renew indefinitely upon the designated renewal period , unless something happens . Some examples of things that can happen that will cease the automatic renewal are : you cancel your policy ; you do n't pay your premium ; you make a lot of claims and your insurance company submits a letter of non-renewal ; you committed fraud and the insurance company cancels the policy . These are just a few of the reasons a policy might cease . However , absent some type of notice your policy will renew . I hope this helps .
That is an excellent question ! One of two things will happen . If the policy was paid up long ago , and has remained in effect , then it acts like any other policy , and when the insured passes , it pays out . Unfortunately , what happens most often is that Parents had a policy on the child , the parent that paid the bills passes , the policy does n't get paid , goes into grace period , and then lapses , and cancels . All those years of payments go up in smoke . Please ensure that your loved ones have a copy , or access to , your finances , sand their payment schedules , so that this does n't happen to you . I have had to have the conversation about unpaid policies far too often , and each time it breaks my heart to see the child realize there is no insurance . Thanks for asking !
What happens if I cancel an life insurance policy ? Well first any unused premium past the effective date of your cancelation is returned to you . If you are cancelling a cash value policy , the cash values minus any surrender charges -LRB- if any at all -RRB- will also be returned to you .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
what happens to my life insurance when I retire ? If the life insurance is provided by your employer it will depend on what they offer . It might end immediately , it might carry on into retirement or you might be offered to carve out an individual policy from the group plan . There is n't a single answer as plans are different . If you `` own '' the policy what happens to your life insurance is what ever you want to have happen to it .
It may be possible for a car insurance company to `` short rate '' your requested cancellation which means that they would retain a certain small percentage above and beyond what has been fully earned for the term and refund you the balance . That had been a more common practice years ago but for the most part , that does n't happen too much any more . For the most part , your policy would be cancelled as requested and the appropriate refund of any pre paid premium returned to you without any additional charge . Naturally , the amount of refund would be determined by the amount you had pre paid or the term and where you happen to be in that term .
Let 's say you have a renters policy in one state and you move to another state where your insurer does not even do business . This happens all the time . I would advise you do two things . 1 -RRB- wait until the physical move is over with and 2 -RRB- wait till you have in your hands the replacement policy . Then it is safe to mail the original policy back to your agent or company and ask for the policy to be cancelled . Privacy concerns would require that you either send the original policy back , or the company may require more specific information form you to effect cancellation to be sure the person saying to cancel a policy is in fact you . Many states authorize the manner in which cancellations take place , so talk to your insurance professional . At the Insurance Browser Inc. we are licensed in several states so if you move from GA to Texas we can handle the whole transaction , old and new .
Auto insurance is an at will product . This means that you could change carriers at any time that you wish . What normally happens at the point of cancellation is your current carrier will refund any unused portion of paid premium . If you are working with a local agent and have concerns about cancelling your current policy talk with them and they should be able to assist you with the cancellation .
It seems that your father bought an insurance policy for the purpose of you to have a policy of your own when you are no longer dependent under him . The decision will rely on who bought the policy and who was designated to pay for the policy which should have been your father since he opened up the policy . On the application will ask who is owner of policy and who will pay the premium . In insurance dependents are children of parents 25 and under . When a policy is taken out on child by a parent they receive lower rates , or even a rider which is an additional form that will cover all child dependents no matter the number until the age 25 . Once at that age they can become insured on their own policy at a guaranteed issue no matter what . In your case , you was not owner of policy , and you did not take over the policy . You dad owned the policy since he was the pay or even if the policy was written on you . You should have officially signed applications to own the policy , and it turned over to you . So , if not they have no course for action , since , you did not own the policy . You owe them nothing and you may cancel unless you voluntarily took over ownership . You may still cancel the policy anytime you desire . It also seems you have no beneficiaries . Also he may have taken the policy out on you in order to insure you in the event something happens to you which will relieve the financial burden upon the family .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
What happens when you cancel whole life insurance ? In addition to loosing your coverage there may be tax consequences on the cash surrender value . Check before you do surrender to avoid any surprises . Before you cancel the policy you should explore other options with your agent . There could be other ways to accomplish your financial planning objective . Perhaps a policy loan , a policy change , or a reduction to name a few . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When you buy a home insurance policy , its not a contract for life . If you are unhappy with your current coverage , you can easily switch to a new home insurance company . Before making this move , there are just a few things you need to do beforehand . The first thing you should do is review your current insurance policy . See when it is scheduled to end as well as if there are any costs for ending your contract early . For example , if you cancel a prepaid policy , some companies give you your unearned premium payments back while others will not . Check to see if it makes more financial sense to cancel the policy or just wait for it to expire . When you decide to make a move , you can contact your new insurance company and ask them to set up your new policy . You will need to fill out a short application to set up your coverage . When you submit your application , be sure to include your insurance premium as well . You wont be covered until after the insurance company receives your premium payment . Once your new policy is up and running , you can cancel your old policy . Call up your old company and tell them you want to end your coverage . They will mail you a document telling you your coverage is over and will also return any money they might owe you . After you finish cancelling your policy , you have finished switching home insurance companies .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
If you decide to cancel your existing homeowners policy and purchase coverage with another company there are some simple steps to follow . The company that will assume coverage should issue a binder or evidence of insurance . You should send a copy of that to the mortgage holder , if there is one . You should provide your former company with a cancellation notice , either formally or informally . Under most circumstances the previous insurance company will charge a pro-rata cancellation , charging you only for the days that they provided coverage . The new policy has a start date which will normally be the anniversary of future renewals . The lender though is the key and must know what is happening . You have an obligation to keep the property covered and they have a right to secure coverage if they discover that there was any period during which there wasnt the prescribed coverage .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Add My Mother To My Health Insurance ?
You would typically not add your mother to your health insurance plan - additions are generally limited to spouse and children . There is not a savings in premium , so you 're not missing anything there . I understand you might be trying to include her in a family deductible , but if you fill out an application , you 'll notice that there is not a spot where you could enter `` mother '' .
This is a very common question . The answer is yes . Let me give you an example of what one of my clients did . It was very thoughtful . My client is a woman in her 30s . She is very devoted to her mother , who is in her 60s . Her mother took great care of her when she was growing up , and now she wanted to pay your mother back . She makes sure her mother lacks for nothing . She bought her a house , and pays her monthly bills . She bought her a car . She treats her to vacations . Her whole attitude is that my mother took great care of me , and now that I have the money , Im going to take great care of her . Of course , all the money she is spending now on her mother , is money she can not spend on herself and her own future . She is basically depleting her retirement fund for her mothers care . She came to me and basically said that she would like to get reimbursed at some point for the money she is spending on her mother . She will happily provide for her mother as long as a mother is alive ; however , when she dies , she would like to have an insurance benefit paid to her to replenish her own retirement fund . The goal was to get a life insurance company to offer a policy on her mother for that reason . And I did it . It took some digging , but I did find a life insurance company to buy into that concept . They did set a limit on the face amount , but it was reasonable as far as what my client wanted to accomplish . Certainly a win-win situation .
Imagine that I own a brand new Corvette and you own a five year old Fiat . Would you want to pay the same amount for auto insurance as me ? What if I only drove my car on Sundays and only went 20 miles and always had my mother in the seat with me , while you drove 700 miles a week on foggy dangerous roads . Should we pay the same amount ? But my mother is a previous race car driver and has three moving violations in the past 30 days . You have a perfect driving record . Should we pay the same amount ? I dont call that discrimination , I call that adjusting the risk . The insurance company calls it underwriting .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
You would typically not add your mother to your health insurance plan - additions are generally limited to spouse and children . There is not a savings in premium , so you 're not missing anything there . I understand you might be trying to include her in a family deductible , but if you fill out an application , you 'll notice that there is not a spot where you could enter `` mother '' .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Congratulations ! You have asked the question that millions of Americans are struggling with and will be struggling with for years to come . Without being self-serving to my industry , find yourself an experienced and well qualified health insurance agent to shop the market for you and to explain the fine details of the options available to you . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- has accomplished what many thought impossible - making health insurance more expensive and even more complicated to understand than it already was . Buying health insurance online , whether it 's through the government marketplaces or private sites , is not like shopping around for the best deal on a hotel room or an airplane ticket . You will encounter a bizarre world of seemingly similar looking insurance products with wildly different prices or similarly priced products with wildly different benefit designs . I guide people through this maze and it really does n't matter if they have a 10th grade education or a PhD , they are amazed at the subtle differences I have to point out that make the real differences in the health insurance products they purchase . For example , one insurance carrier here in Tennessee offers identical insurance products in the government marketplace but has three different PPO network options attached to them . The average person would look at these products , determine that the benefits are the same and so why not pick the one with the lowest monthly premium ? What they have painfully learned later is that they have enrolled in a health plan with a very narrow network of doctors , hospitals and pharmacies . The hospital a few miles from their house that they assumed was in-network because it is part of the overall health system they have been familiar with in the past turns out not to be included in this narrow network product and instead they may have to go across town or to another county -LRB- in more rural areas -RRB- to go to an in-network hospital . Another major carrier uses terms like `` Local Preferred '' and `` National Preferred '' to differentiate their products . A quick scan of the benefit summaries reveals only slight differences in office visit & prescription copays , deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums but unless you really dig deep you wo n't be able to figure out one limits your pharmacy choices significantly while the other does not . Other insurance companies whose plans people have been familiar with and even enrolled in for years have found that these company 's products have transformed into products that now require primary care referrals for visits to specialists and other services or that they provide little or no coverage outside of their immediate geographic area . Just this week I spent about 3 hours explaining his different options to a man in his early 30 's who is smart enough to run his own business and who has been my customer for 6 years . The next morning he had his mother call me so I could explain the same things to her so she could help him feel good about his final decision . This is the reality of what the average consumer is now faced with in today 's health insurance marketplace . My advice , it 's a jungle out there . Do n't go in without a trained guide and beware of these so called `` navigators '' and `` assistants '' they are unlicensed , poorly trained -LRB- perhaps good intentioned -RRB- individuals who can do little more than read the same material on a computer that you can see .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
The answer is in your court documents . For me , my son lived with his mother about 65 % of the time , we had joint custody and since she was primary , she was responsible for providing the health insurance . Any out of pocket costs we split 50/50 . I did not have to pay extra support for health insurance . That said , I know of others who had to split the cost of health insurance and out of pocket expenses . Talk to your attorney or see your court papers .
My mother is 81 and in good health . I have found a few great companies that offer great life insurance products for people of that age group , to 85 . The fact of the matter is , I bought term insurance on her a few years ago -LRB- before I became an agent and did not know better -RRB- now that she is getting older and the premiums keep increasing on the term insurance I can get various types of whole life insurance on her for a couple of hundred dollars more a month in premiums . However , the policies that I have found are at twice or three times the face amount of the term insurance . So , it is possible . You just have to find an agent that will do the research for you . If you live in North Florida I would love to meet with you and discuss the possibilities . If you live in another state , contact one of the knowledgeable and competent agents on here . From the answers I have read they are very good at what they do . If you live outside of the North Florida area , and still have questions for me please feel free to contact me and I will help you any way I can .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
Based on my 32 years of experience as a broker , I do not believe that an elective C-Section is covered by a standard individual or private health insurance plan . I am assuming that the normal vaginal delivery was recommended and deemed safe for the expectant mother and the attending physician did NOT recommend the C-Section .
A quick add on to the above : Having a baby or adopting is a Qualifying Event for the whole family . So if for some reason the mother was on a health insurance plan , but the husband was not he would now be part of the Qualifying Event and be able to choose a plan during the 60 day window .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
end question
start question
annuities
What License Do I Need To Sell Annuities ?
The license you need to sell annuities depends on the type of annuity you intend to sell . For fixed and indexed annuities you need a regular life insurance license . For variable annuities you will need a securities license , specifically a FINRA series 6 license . A FINRA series 7 license will also work .
The license you need to sell annuities depends on the type of annuity you intend to sell . For fixed and indexed annuities you need a regular life insurance license . For variable annuities you will need a securities license , specifically a FINRA series 6 license . A FINRA series 7 license will also work .
You can buy annuities from Life insurance agents who sell them . If the annuity you are seeking to purchase is a variable annuity , you will need to do business with an agent who has securities licenses that allow him/her to sell them . Non-variable -LRB- fixed or indexed -RRB- annuities do not require a securities license to sell them , just a Life insurance license .
To see fixed annuities , it takes an insurance license in Life and Annuities -LRB- the Life license covers both -RRB- . To sell variable annuities , it takes a series 6 -LRB- limited investment securities license -RRB- or series 7 license . The latter entitles the representative to work with all types of securities products , minus commodities and futures . If the agent selling fixed annuities needs to roll over funds from a qualified plan into the fixed annuity , a series 6 or 7 license is also required .
There are two main types of annuities : Fixed and Variable . In order to sell Fixed annuities you need an insurance license for the state that you want to sell the annuity in . In order to sell a Variable annuity you need both an active state license as well as a securities license .
Yes , you do need a license to sell life insurance in Maine . If selling products that do not involve securities , the license is simply called a Life Insurance Producer 's License issued by the Maine Department of Insurance . It requires passing an exam and paying fees to get that type of license . Selling variable products also require a couple of securities licenses .
To sell fixed annuities the agent needs to be licensed in life insurance . A licensed life agent can also sell indexed annuities . The exception would be if the agent was facilitating the purchase of the fixed annuity with existing stocks , bonds or mutual funds owned by the annuity applicant . In that situation , the agent would need some additional securities licenses to handle the sale .
Great question . It 's one that seems to get annuities or the people that sell them into a little hot water . What is your definition of competitive returns ? Annuities are not designed to compete with market returns . That being said , Fixed Indexed Annuities might , I said might be able to do that . If you want an annuity to keep up with market gains during a long term bull market like we saw from 1982 thru 1999 you wo n't , but if you are looking to keep up with a market situation like we 've seen since 2000 it could . I said could . Annuities are not designed to keep up with the market , but they might . Annuities should be utilized for what they will do not what they might do . I wo n't address Variable Annuities , I am not securities licensed so ca n't answer that end of the equation . Hope this helps .
Most basically a life insurance license is a license to sell life insurance . But you can think of it as a certificate issued by the State that certifies that the holder of the license has studied the laws governing life insurance and the practices involved , and has passed rigorous tests to verify that the person knows those laws and the serious consequences of violating them . The life insurance license makes the person eligible to be appointed by life insurance companies to sell their fixed life insurance and annuity products . THen the licensed person has to learn all about the products the company offers before they can actually sell them .
Yes , you can sell fixed and indexed annuities with a Life license . If you sell variable annuities you need a securities license . In addition , if your client is funding their fixed annuity with money from stocks , bonds , or mutual funds , you must have a series 6 , 7 , or 63 license in order to liquidate those funds and put them into the fixed annuity .
Variable life insurance is another form of whole life insurance . There is no special license needed . As long as you have a license to sell life insurance you would be able to sell variable life . Which license you need to sell life insurance varies state to state . In my state of Florida all you need is a 2-15 or a 2-14 license .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
You buy annuities through licensed life insurance agents . If the annuity is variable , the agent must have some securities licenses in order to be able to sell it to you . If the annuity is fixed or indexed , an agent with a license in Life insurance can sell you that type of annuity .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
Insurance agents who are licensed in Life coverage can sell annuities . Indexed annuities are a contract with the annuity holder and the life insurance company in which the funds grow tax deferred . As long as the agent is not funding the Equity Indexed Annuity with qualified funds , no series 63 license is needed to sell this product .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
A life insurance license is what gives you the right to sell life insurance . Life insurance licenses are governed by state regulators . You must take educational courses and pass an exam to get your license . There are fees to pay and conduct codes to meet , then you must take continuing education to keep your license . If you want to sell life insurance in more than one state , you must get a license in each state .
Great question ! To sell insurance , you will need a license from your state 's department of insurance , and product training . Are you looking at joining a particular company ? Many of them will help you in finding an exam study course to help you with the licensing exam , fingerprinting , etc. . It can be very pricy at the beginning to cover the fees for the steps involved in your licensing , so be prepared . Before you can sell some products , you will have to complete the company 's training courses . Each state that you would like to sell in will require a license also . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
To sell disability insurance , you will need to have a health insurance agent license . Some states may also ask for you to have a life license as well so I would recommend checking with your brokerage you have your contracts through or contact the carrier directly to speak with someone in the agent services department to get an answer for a specific carrier and/or state . Please note , many states charge the same fees whether you 're getting a health license only or both life and health . I would recommend getting your life license as well even if you do n't primarily sell life insurance because you never know if there is an opportunity for a life insurance sale on top of the health insurance sale . Just my two cents on the question . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance agents sell annuities because annuities are contracts with life insurance companies . If the annuities are not variable , any licensed life insurance agent can sell them . If buying a variable annuity , or if using qualified funds in the transaction , you must use a life insurance agent with the proper securities licenses .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
What Is Covered With Critical Illness Insurance ?
What is covered with critical illness insurance is spelled out in each policy , and differs from company to company . The basic critical illnesses are stroke , heart attack and some types of cancer . The cancer is usually the more serious kind , although some policies will pay a partial benefit for milder types of cancer . Some other critical illnesses that may be covered are organ transplant , Parkinson 's , Alzheimer 's , kidney failure , coronary bypass , blindness , deafness , or paralysis .
The health conditions that are covered by critical illness insurance are determined by what is specified on each policy . The three primary ones are stroke , heart attack and cancer . Some policies also cover such health conditions as major organ transplant , coronary bypass surgery , kidney failure , paralysis , blindness , deafness , or MS. Payments are made in a lump sum , or over a course of payments , upon diagnosis of a qualifying condition .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Critical Illness insurance is a specified disease based coverage meant to provide a tax free , lump sum face amount up diagnosis of a covered illness.There are several insurance carriers who offer this coverage and as you can imagine , each carrier covers different conditions . That said , there are a select few States where the Department of Insurance has not approved Critical Illness insurance for sale within that specific State . Anyway , of all the conditions covered ... the most important are Heart Attack , Cancer and Stroke . Not to downplay the seriousness of other diagnosed conditions but nearly 80 % of all claims that will get paid from these policies are due to those three conditions . Each carrier offers coverage for other conditions . Some carriers offer coverage for 21 different conditions , while other carriers may limit their coverage to 4 or 5 conditions . Please understand that when looking into Critical Illness coverage , the most important thing to look for is not just what conditions are covered but how they are covered . The benefit definitions are a major consideration and it is `` critical '' -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- to know the benefit definitions prior to purchase . There are carriers who provide a stroke benefit but will not pay a benefit unless the neurological deficit of the stroke persists for 30 days ... whereas there area few carriers who will pay a stroke benefit once the neurological deficit persists 96 hours . I hope this helped answer your question .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
The marketing brochure for the critical illness product you are looking into should clearly state which specific critical conditions are covered under the policy and any situations that might trigger a partial payment under the policy . For example , generally , critical illness policies will at least cover heart attacks , strokes , certain organ transplants and usually cancer . Depending upon the company and the policy it markets there may be other conditions it covers or there may be situations where certain conditions will trigger only a partial payment of the policy 's face amount . You should carefully study the marketing materials you are presented , ask for clarifications of how the policy will work in any circumstances you have any questions about and , if possible , you might want to do some comparison shopping . All critical illness policies are not created equal and there coverage , benefit amounts and costs can vary significantly from insurance carrier to insurance carrier .
Critical Illness policies cover cancer , but may exclude low grade prostate cancer , or pay a reduced amount if the Gleason score is under 7 . Each critical illness policy is different , so you need to carefully read the listed conditions in your policy to see what stages of prostate cancer your critical illness insurance covers .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Happens When My Term Life Insurance Ends ?
Unless your policy is renewable -LRB- at a higher premium -RRB- or convertible to a permanent plan , your term insurance ceases to exist . Any monies paid in is pure cost . There are some term plans that offer Return of Premium riders at an extra cost . Unless you die during the term period there is no equity in a term policy .
When your Term life insurance ends , it will usually jump up in price by a huge increase , and this price can then go up every year . So most people choose to purchase a new policy at that time , if they are able to qualify medically or age-wise for a new policy . If you have a conversion option , you can convert your Term insurance to Permanent , even if your health has declined , if you convert within the time frame allowed . This also will cause a big price increase because you are then purchasing permanent insurance at an older age than when you bought your Term policy .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
what happens to my life insurance when I retire ? If the life insurance is provided by your employer it will depend on what they offer . It might end immediately , it might carry on into retirement or you might be offered to carve out an individual policy from the group plan . There is n't a single answer as plans are different . If you `` own '' the policy what happens to your life insurance is what ever you want to have happen to it .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
Some questions you might ask when considering life insurance are : 1 -RRB- What is the rating of this company ? 2 -RRB- Are the rates guaranteed not to go up ? 3 -RRB- Does this policy have cash value ? If so , please show me an illustration . 4 -RRB- Will you be working with me if I need any assistance with my policy in the future ? 5 -RRB- What happens when the terms ends ? -LRB- if buying Term insurance -RRB- 6 -RRB- What riders are available for this policy ? 7 -RRB- How do I borrow from this policy ? -LRB- if buying Whole or Universal Life -RRB- 8 -RRB- What policy has the best rates for my health ? 9 -RRB- May I also get coverage for my spouse ? 10 -RRB- What if I want to drop this policy in the future ? There are many other questions you could ask , but these are some common ones that people ask me . This assumes you know how much coverage you need , and what type . Otherwise , those are also questions you will want to discuss with your agent .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
Term life insurance may end at the end of the term , or it may go up in price at the end of the term . The end of the term is the period when the guaranteed premium ends . E.g. . If you buy a ten year term policy , the policy will end or the premium will go up at the start of year 11 . Because the premiums go up so high , most people do end their term policies when the term ends . However , if there is a provision for the premium to go up -LRB- called annually renewable -RRB- , it can go up to whatever age the policy dictates . Some are annually renewable as high as age 90 . Another option offered for many term policies is to convert the policy to permanent insurance . This must be done before the term ends . Again , the price per thousand dollars of coverage is much higher for the new policy than it was for the term policy . However , it is a good option if you can not qualify for new insurance , and you may be able to take a smaller face amount to keep the premium affordable .
That is a great question ! Unlike a whole life policy , which ends when you do , term policies almost always end before you do . It 's why they are so cheaply offered , statistically , the companies rarely have to pay out , compared to whole life policies . So when they do end , you have really only three choices : walk away as if there never was a policy , -LRB- since there is nothing contractually obligating either of you anymore , in the typical policy case -RRB- , hope that the policy has a conversion clause -LRB- one that allows your paid premiums to be converted to a paid up whole life policy with a greatly reduced face value -RRB- , or you renew the policy . If you choose the latter , be prepared for the policy to renew in one year terms , and for the price to go up exponentially each time . They get very expensive very quickly . This can be a real problem if it happens when age or health issues prevent you from finding another company that will write you . This is often the case with the term policies that companies like AARP and AAA offer , policies that end when you turn 80 . With life expectancy now averaging years longer than 80 , and the increasing costs as you age , more and more Elder citizens find themselves out a lot of money , and with no protection . Please be careful when you are looking at these kinds of policies , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
Term Life means life insurance that will end after a certain term , or number of years . E.g. 20 year Term will end after 20 years . It is assumed that the price will stay the same for the entire term , but not every policy 's price is guaranteed to stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for the entire term . So look at that feature when you pick out your Term policy . Also , Term life does not usually just end when the term ends ; it usually jumps way up in price and then can go up every year after that . If you need to keep the policy for a short time after the term ends , it is possible , but not economically feasible for most people to keep up for very long . When the term ends , most people buy a new policy , if they are able to qualify for one at that time .
Term life insurance is life insurance that covers you for a `` term '' , or temporary period of time . The most common terms are 10 , 15 , 20 , or 30 years . The premium will usually stay the same during the term , then jump up to a very high price at the end of the term . After that , it will continue to go up every year . Some policies simply end when the term ends . Term policies have no cash value . You will not receive any money back -LRB- unless you took ROP term , in which case it would return the premiums you paid in , at the end of the term -RRB- . People buy Term insurance for it 's relatively low price . If you can afford to pay the premiums for Whole Life or Universal Life , you might end up paying less overall , because your premiums can end at some point but your policy can stay in effect . With Term , when you quit paying premiums , your coverage ends . If you have a temporary need , Term can be a great choice .
What do you need to know about term life insurance ? You need to know that : 1 -RRB- Unless you have some type of rider stating otherwise , term life insurance will jump way up in price at the end of the term , and go up in price annually after that . Or it will end at the end of the term . 2 -RRB- Most term life insurance will stay the same premium during the entire term , and the death benefit will stay the same for the entire term . But you need to ask your agent to make sure you are buying a guaranteed level premium , and a guaranteed level death benefit , to be sure . 3 -RRB- There is no cash value in term life insurance . Only ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- term will pay back a substantial cash value if you keep it enough years , and are alive at the end of the term . 4 -RRB- If you miss a payment more than two months , your term policy will end . There is no cash value in it to pay the premium , so it is very important to keep up your payments with term life insurance . 5 -RRB- Many term policies are convertible to permanent insurance for at least part of the term period . If you convert your term policy , you must convert it to the policy or policies stipulated by the life insurance company at that point in time . These policies may or may not have lifetime guarantees , but will be UL or WL . The rate will be based on your age at the time of conversion . There are no health requirements ; your permanent policy will be rated similarly to what your term policy was rated .
Term Life Insurance Ends when the contract period is over . Term life Insurance ends when you havent paid your premium and the reinstatement period is over . Term life insurance ends when a death claim occurs while the policy is in force . Term life insurance ends and permanent life insurance begins when the conversion privilege is exercised on the existing term life insurance policy .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value , but if you get what is called Return of Premium Term -LRB- ROP Term -RRB- , it has a form of cash value . About midway through the term , depending on the policy , it will pay back some of the premiums paid in , IF you cancel the policy . By the end of the term , this type of policy will generally pay back all the premiums you paid in . Some negatives : This cash is not available unless you surrender the policy . If you are table rated , it may be that only the premiums up to standard are paid back to you . The price is substantially higher than regular Term Life Insurance . Some positives : If you bought regular Term Life and invested the extra you would have spent on ROP Term , it could take a return of over 5 % every year on the difference , to earn what you would get back , tax free , by keeping ROP Term to the end . Unlike regular Term , longer terms often cost less than shorter terms , with ROP Term . Finally , getting back all your premiums if you are still alive at the end of the term is a great way to have `` free '' coverage and then get back enough for a final expense fund when the term ends .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
The age that Life Insurance ends is dependent on the age that the person was when they took it out , and the type of policy they took out . For Term Life Insurance , the policy ends -LRB- or goes up in price to what is usually an unaffordable cost -RRB- at the end of the term . Therefore , someone who is 55 years old and takes out a 10 year Term policy will have to find a new policy at age 65 . For Whole Life Insurance , the policy ends when death occurs or when the policy matures -LRB- typically at age 100 -RRB- . At either time , the full amount of the death benefit is paid -LRB- when the policy matures , you are actually receiving the cash value , which becomes equal to the death benefit , called `` endowment '' -RRB- . If you quit paying premiums on the policy , or borrow without paying it back , the policy could end sooner without any benefit being paid . This is true for any type of Life Insurance policy . Some Whole Life policies are paid for with a single premium ; as long as you do n't borrow from them , those will be in effect upon death or maturity without paying any more premiums , as will any policy that is `` paid up '' at a certain point . Universal Life operates much like Whole Life , except you can pick an age at which your guaranteed coverage will end .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance Worth It ?
Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can be a great thing depending upon your situation . If you were unable to work , starting today , for the next two years , what effect would that have on your life ? Would you be able to come up with enough funds to pay your current bills ? What about medical bills for the condition keeping you out of work ? Next consider the effect compared to the price of the insurance that is being offered to you . If you ca n't afford the premiums or feel the benefit you may receive from them does n't outweigh the money spent towards it , then , no , it 's not worth it . Otherwise , yes , you should consider picking up the insurance . A licensed agent can help you determine the value in your specific case .
Whether Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is worth it to you depends on whether you can survive at least 5 months without your salary , or would be willing to work at a job you can do vs a job you were trained for . Both of these must occur before being able to get Social Security Disability . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can pay approximately 60 % of your salary while recovering from a long illness of slow healing injury until you can get your old type of job back . That is worth it , to most people .
Whether Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is worth it to you depends on whether you can survive at least 5 months without your salary , or would be willing to work at a job you can do vs a job you were trained for . Both of these must occur before being able to get Social Security Disability . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can pay approximately 60 % of your salary while recovering from a long illness of slow healing injury until you can get your old type of job back . That is worth it , to most people .
Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is a group disability insurance plan offered to employees at group rates . It is usually provided through payroll deductions . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance will pay a portion of the employee 's salary to them in cash if the employee is disabled due to illness or injury .
As stated , voluntary Term is offered on group policies and is voluntary , meaning you do not have to take it . Term insurance means that it is only offered for a specific period . Never rely on voluntary term as your whole insurance package . This only covers you while you are employed . That is why it is called term insurance . Some contracts will allow you to convert it to a permanent policy if you leave your job but that would be at a much higher rate . Most however do not offer that option . Some individual health policies also offer voluntary term insurance . This covers you while you have that policy but you lose it if you change insurance companies . You are better off in most cases to purchase insurance on your own .
Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can be a great thing depending upon your situation . If you were unable to work , starting today , for the next two years , what effect would that have on your life ? Would you be able to come up with enough funds to pay your current bills ? What about medical bills for the condition keeping you out of work ? Next consider the effect compared to the price of the insurance that is being offered to you . If you ca n't afford the premiums or feel the benefit you may receive from them does n't outweigh the money spent towards it , then , no , it 's not worth it . Otherwise , yes , you should consider picking up the insurance . A licensed agent can help you determine the value in your specific case .
Voluntary term life is a group product where participation is not mandatory . An employee can choose to purchase voluntary life , usually through payroll deduction . Depending on the plan , voluntary can be a guaranteed issue or simple underwriting plan . Guaranteed Issue would just be signing up and paying the premium and Simplified Issue might involve answering a few questions . Either way , most will pay more in price for these plans . Simple rule of thumb with insurance , the fewer questions , the higher the cost . If you 're a fit person , in good shape and health , a voluntary payroll plan gives you some convenience , but not any cost savings .
What is voluntary life insurance ? Voluntary life insurance is usually something you 'll find in the workplace offered through your employer 's HR office . The voluntary means it 's an optional benefit choice for an employee . Usually voluntary life is sold on a guaranteed basis with little to no underwriting . Again since the few questions , the higher the cost or the lower the benefit .
Employee life insurance usually refers to a group term life insurance plan provided as a benefit for employees of a company . But employee life insurance can also include voluntary plans and business life insurance policies such as those used in conjunction with a non-qualified deferred compensation agreement . In some cases the employer pays all or part of the premium . Voluntary life premiums are normally paid by the employee . Group term life plans and voluntary insurance allow the employee to name the beneficiary . Business life insurance plans usually have the employer as the beneficiary .
Usually the term `` Voluntary '' life insurance refers to a policy which may be purchased through your place of employment . Generally `` Voluntary '' life insurance is purchased through a group contract made between your employer and the insurance company . `` Voluntary '' life insurance can be a very good purchase as some companies will relax their underwriting requirements for those who participate and some insurance companies will even offer guarenteed issue type policies for those employees that participate . One of the other benefits of these policies is that they may be able to have the premiums deducted from your pay check according to how you are paid -LRB- weekly , bi-weekly , monthly , etc -RRB- . Other than how they are purchased `` Voluntary '' life policies are the same as any other life policy that you can by , in that they allow you to own the policy and assign beneficiaries as you desire . In most cases , if you leave your employment you may continue your policy by paying the monthly premiums from your bank account as they come due . I would caution though , that you should talk to the insurance company representative , when they come to enroll the group or service the account , as some policies may have different rules than others .
what is a voluntary disability plan ? These are plans offered through your employer that can very much be worthwhile to the employees of a company . Underwriting is usually lighter , cost is competitive and for the more blue collar occupations , a voluntary group disability plan is a great idea as it is very difficult to get disability on your own with a blue collar occupation .
What is voluntary term life insurance ? Usually it is a program offered through your employer to provide employees with an opportunity to purchase life insurance through work and payroll deduction . In some cases , voluntary group life offers life coverage at a higher cost , but with fewer health questions and no lab testing . The thing to keep in mind when considering life insurance is the more questions they can ask , the cheaper the cost will be for a healthy person . That does n't mean Voluntary life is bad , it means you may find coverage cheaper elsewhere .
A state approved voluntary plan for Disability Insurance is offered by the State of California . Employers in California may use the State Plan or a Voluntary Plan to cover their employees . Contact the Employment Development Dept for the State of California for details and options for your Disability coverage .
Technically there are n't voluntary health insurance plans but there are voluntary insurance plans that are designed to supplement your existing health insurance plan . Voluntary benefit plans are one of the few growth areas in the health insurance market space and we are seeing new products being introduced and new insurance companies entering this arena on a regular basis these days . Generally , when people are talking about supplementary health plans they are referring to insurance policies that address specific issues such as ; 1 -RRB- Accident insurance - makes a payment to the policyholder when the experience a covered accident like falling and breaking your arm . 2 -RRB- Hospital Indemnity - these policies usually pay a fixed dollar amount per day or per admission for a hospitalization . These policies may also provide fixed dollar benefits for a certain number of doctor 's office visits , urgent care/minor medial or emergency room visits . 3 -RRB- Critical Illness - these policies pay a fixed amount upon the diagnosis of certain specified illnesses such as heart attacks & strokes , organ transplants , cancer , kidney failure . The illnesses covered and the benefit amount will vary from one supplementary insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . 4 -RRB- Cancer - these policies specifically address the diagnosis and treatment of various types of cancer . 5 -RRB- GAP Plans - plans designed to cover the financial exposure of having a high deductible health insurance plan . There are other variations on the theme and , as stated earlier , this is an area where new products are constantly being introduced . While this trend has been going on for a while , it has certainly been accelerated with passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- and the need to address the movement towards higher deductible plans that shift more cost onto the insured person .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
How to get short term disability coverage ? Well , you may first need to check with your employer 's HR and see if there is a group plan you can join . If your employer does n't provide short term disability coverage , they may allow for voluntary disability plans to be purchased via payroll deduction . You can also find individual disability and set it up to work like a short term plan . However , with individual the best usually you can do is 30 days wait for illness and possibly a week or two for accidents .
What is voluntary short term disability insurance ? Probably something offered through payroll deduction by your employer to provide extra income protection for their employees . STDI is paycheck protection in case of illness or off the clock injury that would n't be covered by worker 's comp . This is for those broken legs skiing or sliding into second . Those weeks of chemo when you 're too sick to work . Voluntary means it is up to you how valuable this coverage is .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is a provision of group life insurance , where the employee may purchase additional coverage beyond what the employer provides . Voluntary Term Life Insurance can also extend to the spouse or dependents of the employee . The employee is able to purchase the additional coverage at group rates .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is offered to employees who have some life insurance provided to them by their employers , and their employers are giving them the opportunity to purchase additional life insurance coverage at group rates . Employer provided life insurance is not taxable to $ 50,000 whereas voluntary life insurance purchased beyond that amount will be a taxable to the employee .
Medicare Supplement , or Medigap insurance was more of an evolution than anything else . The federal government put forward a voluntary certification option for insurers in Section 507 of the Social Security Disability Amendments of 1980 which had minimum standards . There were at least three legislative acts that began the structure of Medigap regulations : The Medicare and Medicaid Patient and Program Protection Act of 1987 , The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 , and The Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 . The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 replaced some voluntary guidelines with federal standards and was later amended in 1995 . The `` lettered '' plans came to be in the 1990s with some being dropped in 2010 leaving the main Medigap plans we how have . To most folks , the Medigap plans can be confusing and it is always best to work with a knowledgeable insurance professional to find the plan that works best for you .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does my sister get the insurance policy that I carry on my mom when she passes ?
If you are talking about a life insurance policy that you are carrying on your mother ; the policy would typically pay the named beneficiary on the policy and the policy would no longer be active . To have your question answered more fully either contact the carrier of the policy in question or your local agent .
Yes , since your sister is the beneficiary of the policy , she will get the proceeds from your mother 's life insurance policy , even though you pay the premium . You may be the owner of the policy without knowing it ; if so , you can change the beneficiary to yourself . If you mother owns the policy , you could talk to her about changing the beneficiary to you . Whoever owns the policy is the one who can make that change .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Here is a testimonial . I was 12 years old when my little sister died of cancer just before her second birthday . My dad bought life insurance on all 6 of us kids when we were born . This unspeakable tragedy has extended tentacles into our lives in many ways , both good and bad . But my mom said one of the few bright moments during those dark days was that they had life insurance to pay for my sister 's funeral . Had they not gotten her a policy as a newborn , chances are she may no longer have qualified -LRB- due to her cancer diagnosis -RRB- by the time they got around to it .
As with all insurance , it is worth it if the need arises . The unthinkable happened to our family when I was a child , and my mom said that the life insurance policy on my sister was a big help . If she would have survived , my sister would have had that policy to hold onto for the rest of her life despite her cancer history . This personal reason for getting life insurance on kids is not one that I 've expressed before . But obviously , it 's one that I think about .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of reasons why your homeowner 's insurance company would ask for your sister 's renters policy . If your Sister filed a claim in conjunction with your Mom , your Mom 's company would want to assess what would be covered under the terms of that policy , and what they would be responsible for under theirs . They may also be trying to determine who is responsible for paying for the temporary housing costs , and for how long that coverage extends under each policy . They may also be trying to determine if some household items were listed under both policies , and filed as claims by both Mom and your sister . Neither wants to pay for something that the other will , if they do n't have to , you know ? It 's a pretty standard practice for insurance companies to communicate between themselves as much is as legally permitted , so that they can make the proper determinations on who is obligated to pay for what , and that payments are not duplicated . I would not worry too much about it . Thank you for asking , and I 'm glad that neither your Mom or Sister were hurt - that is more important than any of their things .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
To get life insurance on your mom , sit down with her and ask her what medications she takes , her height and weight , what health conditions she has had in the past and currently . Ask her what she wants to spend , or if you are the one who will be paying for it , ask her what amount she would like to see you get for her . It will seem less intimidating if she has a say in it . Then contact a website or agency for a quote . If you are getting it for final expense purposes , you will want to get a permanent policy . When getting life insurance on someone else , it is usually best to buy a No Exam policy , if you can . Your mom may have to do a phone interview to be approved . They will draft the first premium from your or your mom 's checking account when she is approved , and her policy will be in force .
At least enough to cover the cost of taking care of your situation if it happens along with enough to prevent this tragedy from becoming a double whammy for the people who love you and will be the ones cleaning up your business behind you . As a young single man I carried around 50k of life insurance at 19 . Why ? I did n't want my parents who were the people who would have to take care of my stuff I left behind to suffer any financial hardship to do so . Imagine your mom , already dealing with the loss of you , having to also deal with the cost of a service for you , loss of wages from work and other costs . Long before I became an insurance agent I loved my mom enough to not want to make my death even worse for her than it could be . You can apply that thought towards anybody that loves you and will be that person or persons having to deal with your loss . Hopefully , you matter to somebody . That 's what you 're doing it for . At a minimum carry enough to account for your responsibilities and to cover the loss other people will have to take on to deal with your loss . Your loss is hard enough to the people that love you . Do n't make it worse .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
It depends , is there someone who will have to take care of your stuff and clean up your situation if you pass ? In other words , you may be single , but is there somebody who loves you enough to be that person who handles your service , settles your stuff and maybe empties your apartment or home . Usually it 's your mom . The question only you can answer is how much more difficult do you want to make it for your mom ? Is n't losing a child -LRB- no matter what age -RRB- for a mom , hard enough ? Would you want to add to the pain by having her come up with the money to take care of what you leave behind ? Do you want her to forgo wages because of your situation ? For me , as a young man long before insurance as a career came into place , the idea of being single and owning life insurance made sense . I simply did n't want to crush my mom under the burdens of losing me , paying for my service , dealing with my stuff . I know usually somebody will whip out some `` math '' to get you not do what I suggest and that 's fine . Sometimes the `` Math '' simply does n't matter . Your choice .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance should a stay at home mom have ? '' Well if a stay at home mom is the only earner , she 's a single income with children , she needs to look at all the liabilities that she has today . So if she has indebtedness , whether it 's credit card , mortgage , or any kind of auto payments , she 'll want to look at those or future obligations for her children where she may have college education , or retirement plans for them . She 'll want to be able to do some kind of coverage that she can do to protect them in case something happens to them . And remember if they have an ex-spouse involved , you 'll want to make sure that that person also has insurance on them so if something happens to him that mom and the child are taken care of .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
One of the big advantages of life insurance is that it does not have to go through probate . My father died about a year ago , and he had several small life insurance policies . My mom was truly surprised that she had quick access to those funds to pay for Dad 's funeral , without having to wait for probate -LRB- which still has not been completed , as far as I know -RRB- . And surprised again when she just found out for sure that she did not have to pay any taxes on them . No matter how much you trust your agent , it is collecting on life insurance that can make believers of anyone .
Dear Stay @ Home Mom , I agree with David . It depends . It depends on the family situation and financial condition in the event that the Stay at Home Mom would pass away and no longer be able to contribute to the family . Above and beyond the emotional/social value of the parent , there is an economic value that is considered . You may have heard the term `` Human Life Value '' in relation to life insurance . As difficult as it is to do this , it is an attempt to place a monetary value on the contributions of the person who passes away . In the case of a Stay @ Home Mom , the income of the working spouse in addition to the family savings allows the mom to stay home and take care of the children . If she passed away , the surviving spouse would most likely have to pay for day care . So simply projecting out just the additional cost of daycare could be a starting point ... I hope that sheds some light on it , and hopefully that serves as a starting point to talk to a local professional who can help you and your spouse choose the best life insurance coverage for you !
I represented Primerica for over 12 years and know from experience that it is a good company and will pay death claims in a timely manner . The only death claim that I have paid in my career was to the widow of my brother-in-law that past away unexpectedly at the age of 38 . I delivered a check for $ 338,000 to my sister-in-law and her kids since I had replaced a whole life policy with a face of $ 25,000 a year earlier . Like most other companies , Prinerica is a solid company and will be around forever . The reason I left the company and went with my present company , Capital Choice Financial Group , was that I could represent many companies giving me a competitive edge in the marketplace . Also , Capital Choice represented the same concept of Buy Term and Invest the difference and was founded by the brother-in-law of the founder of Primerica .
Life insurance for a child is usually Whole Life insurance that would pay a death benefit if the child should pass away , or provide cash values to use for college or other expenses when they are older . My parents took out life insurance on their six children , and when my sister died as a toddler , the money from the life insurance was a ray of sunshine at a very dark time . However , thankfully , by far the most common use for life insurance for a child is for large expenses when they are older .
Is Life Insurance really worth it ? That depends entirely on the individual involved . For some the idea of protecting their family if they do n't make it home some night is worth a great deal . For others not so much , as it depends on your relationships in life . Even as single young man , I bought life insurance . Why ? cause it was `` worth '' it to me to make sure that my mom could deal with the clean up of the mess I left behind without having to spend the money she worked hard for herself . It was `` worth '' it to me to make a terrible situation that my mom might have to face not a financial hardship at the same time . Later on , it was `` worth '' it to me to have coverage for my wife and kids . This is really a personal answer for each person . I ca n't tell anybody why it 's worth it to them , that has to be their own choice .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
This is a very common question . The answer is yes . Let me give you an example of what one of my clients did . It was very thoughtful . My client is a woman in her 30s . She is very devoted to her mother , who is in her 60s . Her mother took great care of her when she was growing up , and now she wanted to pay your mother back . She makes sure her mother lacks for nothing . She bought her a house , and pays her monthly bills . She bought her a car . She treats her to vacations . Her whole attitude is that my mother took great care of me , and now that I have the money , Im going to take great care of her . Of course , all the money she is spending now on her mother , is money she can not spend on herself and her own future . She is basically depleting her retirement fund for her mothers care . She came to me and basically said that she would like to get reimbursed at some point for the money she is spending on her mother . She will happily provide for her mother as long as a mother is alive ; however , when she dies , she would like to have an insurance benefit paid to her to replenish her own retirement fund . The goal was to get a life insurance company to offer a policy on her mother for that reason . And I did it . It took some digging , but I did find a life insurance company to buy into that concept . They did set a limit on the face amount , but it was reasonable as far as what my client wanted to accomplish . Certainly a win-win situation .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Actually Make People Healthier ?
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Actually , having health insurance does make you healthier . Here ` show : The vast majority of individual and family policies cover preventive services at 100 % . No waiting period , deductible , coinsurance or copay . Routine annualphysicals , OBGYN exams , baby well visits are all included . Since there is no out of pocket cost to you , more than likely , you will take advantage of these free features on your private health insurance plan . And yes ... that will make you healthier . Now excuse me , I have a physical scheduled and better leave . Yes , experienced brokers like myself utilize these benefits . Now if I could just retain that quickness I had on the tennis court 30 years ago ... That would also help !
Does health insurance make you healthier ? You could support the idea that it does . Most plans now have provisions that check ups and shots are covered at 100 % or with a nominal copay . Some employers have plans that offer health club memberships , discounts on bicycle helmets and other activity oriented things . Others offer cash incentives for improved health through the health plan . So through coverage and incentives health insurance can make you healthier .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
`` Better '' is a completely subjective term in this case . The question is really about covering your risk and whether that risk is temporary or permanent . Term insurance is usually used to offset a temporary risk such as a mortgage or other debt that has a specific term . Whole Life , and other types of permanent insurance , are generally used to cover risks that are ongoing with no expiration date , like your income or living expenses . When working with my clients , we spend more time identifying risks and classifying them as temporary or permanent , then assigning amounts to each . The we match the product to the risk and the budget . If cash flow is n't an issue -LRB- which it usually is -RRB- , I recommend 100 % permanent insurance as it 's the most cost effective over the long run . If you live long enough , the cash value in the policy will equal or surpass the premiums paid , effectively making your net outlay zero or better . What I usually find is that people do have a budget but still want to cover themselves properly and we end up covering the temporary risk with term insurance and the permanent risk with some type of permanent insurance , like whole life . The more important question is n't which is better , but how much is needed . Set up correctly , you could start out with mostly or all term insurance and convert it to permanent as your budget allows . Another factor to consider is age and insurability . The earlier in life you buy life insurance and the healthier you are , the less it will cost . In summary , the best insurance is the insurance you buy now , when you 're younger and healthier . Find a good advisor and he/she will help you determine the amount and type which best fits your situation . Get insured first and lock in your insurability . You can always make changes in the future .
They price their products based on risk . That 's what insurance is . If you have a lot of tickets you are likely to wreck your car . You should pay more than a safe driver pays for auto insurance . You are riskier . If you have bad health , you have to pay more for health insurance and life insurance . You are more likely to be making claims on the insurance sooner . To not charge you more would require charging more to healthy people . Health insurance is changing from true insurance to an entitlement program . This will make it less costly than it is now for unhealthy people but it will raise rates for all the healthier and younger ones . It should be a good change but time will tell . But to answer your question ... would YOU want to be the insurance company and charge a 16-year old male driver with three tickets the same rate as the 45-year old woman with no tickets . If you answer yes , you should open an insurance company . You will get a lot of young customers before you go broke .
Definitely . I have companies that go to age 85 . The rates you will receive will be dependent on your health . Life insurance is something that your money pays for but it your health that actually buys it . The healthier you are the better the rates and the greater chance of being approved for the larger policies .
Adverse selection is the primary driver behind the need for the Affordable Care Act to impose a penalty for not purchasing coverage , and for the intense media scrutiny surrounding the demographics of people enrolling through state exchanges . Adverse selection occurs when people expecting to use the healthcare system enroll in health insurance plans at a far higher rate than healthier people . Somebody has to pay more in premium than they receive in benefits - or the premiums will have to rise to cover the sicker population - which in turn causes more healthy people to opt out - which causes premiums to rise further - which in turn ... .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
The cuts are real , and from what I see , the carriers are working to cut their costs in some creative ways . This can be a benefit for those among us that have neglected their health and fitness , or just need a little boost . For instance , fitness programs can now be an included benefit in Medicare Advantage Plans . Some carriers are giving gift cards to get your screenings done . Smoking and obesity education are often available . Yes , a more fit population lowers the cost for the carrier , but so what ! Why not take advantage of their programs , take some initiative and get some healthier life choices . Life is not a dress rehearsal , so make the most of your life by being as healthy as your age and abilities allow . Check out these new benefits , or call your agent to find out what supplemental programs are offered by your carrier . The cuts are not going away , so the healthier you are , the less you will feel the financial pinch of those cuts . Like your mom said , `` eat your vegetables ! ''
Health insurance rates are determined by age , gender , zip code , plan design , your overall health and other factors . Older people usually pay more than younger ones . Healthier people pay less than those who have medical conditions . Plan design also weighs heavily on the rate . Plans with low deductibles -LRB- less than $ 2000 -RRB- and copay 's are more expensive than a high deductible plan that lacks copay 's . A family of 6 will pay more than a family of 2 .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
It is always a good idea to purchase cash value life insurance while you 're young and healthy . Think of it as buying a piece of undeveloped property . You can buy it cheaply and as you hold onto it the value increases over time . Whole life is a valuable asset that works best with a lot of time to work . What really is good about whole life is later in life , when you 're not so young and not so healthy . They ca n't take it back , end it or raise the price . Believe me , as a 53 year old with major health issues the most secure financial tool I own is my whole life insurance . My health as of late , would probably make me uninsurable , so having taken care of that as a younger much healthier man , was one of the smartest things I 've ever done . Also term insurance as you hit your 60 's is not the same product price wise as your 30 's was . It is very expensive and many people in thier 60 's are now looking for low cost term insurance for the next 30 years and are n't finding it . Later in life , term insurance has a way of making whole life purchased at a much younger age a real bargin .
What does it mean to be rated for life insurance ? Being rated means you have a health condition that does n't exclude you from coverage -LRB- declined -RRB- , but ads additional cost to the policy . Also known as `` table rated '' a person could be rated along a range of levels -LRB- tables -RRB- for an illness depending on their individual situation . A great example of table rating is diabetes . When I started 25 years ago , Diabetics were a straight decline for life insurance . No chance . Over the years , as treatment and severity of Diabetes changed , came a `` range '' of health levels that Diabetics can display . There are diabetics who have become healthier than the general population and there are Diabetics who every day struggle with control of thier illness . The insurance industry has figured out these two are not the same individuals health wise . A person with well controlled diabetes may fall into normal class range or low table rates , while a person with less control of their diabetes would be higher on the tabe rates .
This is one of the most widely debated questions in the history of our country . Many people believe a national health plan , also known as a single payor system , is a right that should be granted to all . Others argue a free market system works best , gives consumers more freedom of choice , and offersencouragement to citizens to remain healthier , use less medical care , and better treat themselves through proper diet and exercise . Either answer could be considered correct , based on your personal beliefs . There is little doubt this debate will continue for many years to come , whether the US ever sees a national health care system or not .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
The best age to get life insurance is when you have a need that you want to protect . E.g. getting married , having children , and buying homes are all reasons people buy life insurance . The younger you are and the healthier you are , the lower the premiums , so there is a cost advantage to getting life insurance while you are young .
I am not sure I would call life insurance cheap but it is very affordable for most people . The young and very healthy can purchase life insurance at an amazingly affordable rate . However , as we age , gain weight , health declines and life is more sedimentary , the premiums can really climb for those folks . The best advice is purchase what you need while you are young and healthy and save yourself thousands in premiums over your life time . Remember the actuaries and underwriters are very skilled with predicting a person 's mortality . Take advantage today , we are never going to be any younger or healthier than we are today .
Anyone who can prove insurable interest between the insured and the beneficiaries as well as justify the amount of coverage may apply for life insurance coverage . The second condition is your health condition . Life insurance is a mortality product . Your premium will be a function of your health , the healthier the insured , the lower the premium .
The best time to purchase life insurance is when you are young and healthy : the monthly premium will be low , compared to getting it when you are older . Simply put , the younger and healthier , the better ! Generally , most people start with Term Life Insurance , and convert to a Whole Life or Universal Life . Before purchasing any Life Insurance , talk to your agent ; he/she can best advise you on the best approach to Life Insurance based on you current budget , anticipated needs , and where you are in your life at the time of inquiry .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do I Calculate How Much Life Insurance I Need ?
The conventional approach is to go through a `` needs analysis '' . This method attempts to determine the minimum acceptable amount of coverage you `` need '' in order to meet your stated objectives , such as final expenses , college costs , mortgage payoff , emergency fund , etc. . It is a math calculation based on your estimate of variables such as inflation , taxes , and rate of return . A more meaningful approach is to simply decide how much of your income you want to continue to your family when you die and for how long . After all , it 's your income that ultimately pays for all the individual items mentioned above . Then , an amount of coverage can be calculated based on the same assumptions as in the needs analysis .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The easiest way to come by a calculation on how much life insurance you will need comes down to three factors . First , do I need life insurance . Who would suffer if I died today financially ? Who depends on my income to live and who would assume any of my debts ? Second , what is the total of all of my debt ? Car loans , credit card debt and mortgage , how much to pay it all off today ? How much will I need for children 's education or their living expenses ? Third , take your current nurses salary times ten . Why ten ? The idea is to be able for your beneficiary to invest that amount and draw your replacement salary without touching the principle . Take those numbers and add them together along with the time period that all of that needs to be covered and you will have your face amount and term life years clearly set . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to help you navigate the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck !
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Here is a good calculator help you figure out how much life insurance you may need with one child . It allows you to enter the age of the child as well as a lot of other factors to give you a more precise life insurance suggestion . WEBSITELINK n general , you need to determine how much it costs to raise your child to adulthood , including inflation , and how much would be lost if the insured 's income was lost . Then try to replace that income with life insurance .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Regardless of whether you are in you 50 's and are asking how do I start planning or if you are asking how do I plan on retiring when I am in my 50 's the process is the same . First determine what a successful retirement would look like for you . Once you have a basic outline then you can determine what needs to be done to fund it . The next step would be to work with a financial planner to calculate what needs to be done and how your resources should be allocated to make it happen . You will find addition information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Proceeds Be Paid To A Minor ?
When life insurance proceeds are paid to a minor , it is usually required to have a financial guardian to oversee the distribution of funds to the child until they reach age 18 or age 21 , depending on the state of residence . This can be done ahead of time through a trust .
The desire to take care of children often leads to improper planning . Children require supervision and the money should be left a trustee for the benefit of the children . Often the trustee will supervise the money until the child is 25 or older to make sure that it isnt rapidly consumed in immature activities .
Minors can certainly be named as a beneficiary to an insurance policy . But what you want to consider is what the purpose of the insurance is . If you want the insurance to cover your final and burial expenses then you may not want to name a minor because he or she will not have access to the money until age 18 or 21 depending on where you live . If the purpose is to leave a legacy for the minor , the best thing to do is create a living trust . Name the trust as the beneficiary and earmark those funds for the minor . A living trust is very flexible . You can basically say when and for what reason the minor can have access to the funds . You can say that money can be paid for the minors private education ; you can say the minor gets 25 % at age 21 , etc. . And the best part is whatever you have specified ca n't be changed after your passing AND the trust does not go through probate . So , there is no court intervention or delays .
Minors can be beneficiaries on a life insurance policy . Most of the time minor children are contingent beneficiaries as a backup to their parents if both were to die . But just because you can do it doesnt mean you should it . When minors receive death benefit proceeds after both parents have died custodial control and/or guardianship can arise . The creation of a trust could be a better alternative . Consult with an attorney before placing minor children as beneficiaries on your policy .
Yes , as Peggy mentioned you can name a minor as a beneficiary , however , you would be better served by at the very least leaving it in trust for a minor . Setting up a formal trust expressing your wishes would be preferred . In Canada , since you can direct that the proceeds be paid in the form of an annuity this should be explored . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In the United States your life insurance is separate from your will . However , if there are stipulations to the proceeds to your beneficiary then a will is the correct document to direct those wishes.A willis especially useful when naming a minor child primary beneficiary as to the guardian or trust to disperse proceeds . Seek legal advise if you are considering putting the life insurance proceeds in the will . If it is documented improperly you may trigger income tax on the proceeds which otherwise would be tax free .
A minor can be a life insurance beneficiary , but it is generally in the child 's best interest to make the beneficiary of your life insurance policy be a trust , or trusted relative or friend who will use the money for the welfare of the child . That is because minors can not legally handle the proceeds and the court could appoint a guardian to do so for them .
Yes , a life insurance beneficiary can be a minor . However , if naming a minor as beneficiary , the policy owner should consider naming a financial guardian for the child at the same time , as that will be required by the court if the insured person dies before the child reaches the age of adulthood . If a financial guardian is not designated to handle the life insurance proceeds for the child , the court will appoint one .
I agree , the safest way to leave your child life insurance proceeds is to set up a trust with a trusted attorney . It should only cost a few hundred dollars , but you will have total piece of mind that your children will legally be taken care of in the event of your death . Not only should you consider how the proceeds should be allocated while the child is a minor but may be rationing the proceeds as a young adult . You can only imagine what an 18 or 19 year old would do with a lump sum check of $ 500,000 or more . Within a trust you can allocate funds at different ages or life events , such as a home purchase or marriage , so the money is not spent or `` blown '' on parties or sports cars . A legal trust is your best bet and change the beneficiary to this trust .
If a life insurance beneficiary is a minor , the court will appoint a guardian to handle the money for the child until they reach the age of 18 or 21 , depending on the state . If you want to select that person yourself , you can name a property guardian in your will , or name an adult custodian for the life insurance proceeds under the Uniform Transfers to Minor Act -LRB- UTMA -RRB- .
Gener4ally if a minor is involved it is best to have life insureds proceeds held in a trust until the child 's 18th birthday . There may be exceptions to this depending on the circumstances . I generally do not recommend making a minor the beneficiarry of a policy because of the complications involved .
If a beneficiary is a minor the money would be placed in a trust until the child reaches 18 , in most cases . I do not recommend leaving life insurance proceeds to a minor child . It would be better to either establish a trust or leave it to a trusted family member with instructions that the money be set aside and used for the child . A trust would be the safest way because you can spell out how the children receive the money .
Yes a minor child can be a life insurance proceeds beneficiary . If you plan to make the minor child the primary beneficiary , you should take these steps as well . You should have a will in place to name a trust or legal guardian to hold and disperse the funds until the child turns 18 years old . Otherwise a probate judge will decide the child 's guardianship . That court appointed guardian will disperse the funds .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
Life insurance proceeds do not go to the estate unless the beneficiary chosen on the policy is the estate , or if the beneficiary is a minor and unable to legally receive the proceeds , or several other circumstances . Life insurance that is left to a person or trust will bypass probate and avoid income tax . However , the value of life insurance owned by the deceased , and left to anything but an irrevocable life insurance trust , is counted in the value of the estate for estate tax purposes .
Since minors can not control their life insurance proceeds , you could name a trusted adult who will make sure that the death benefit is used in a responsible manner for the welfare of the children . Or you can set up a trust and make the trust the beneficiary of the policy . In the trust , you can spell out how and when you want the proceeds distributed to the children , name a trustee , and have more control than by naming another person as beneficiary .
Yes , a minor can be a beneficiary on life insurance . However , until they reach the age when they are legally considered old enough to manage their own money -LRB- which is either age 18 or age 20 , depending on the state in which you live -RRB- , someone else will need to be named to manage their money for them . 1 -RRB- This can be someone you specify in your will . Some people even name two guardians : one to take care of the money -LRB- guardian of the estate -RRB- and one to take care of the children -LRB- guardian of the person -RRB- . 2 -RRB- You can create a trust to be the beneficiary of the policy , with the trust spelling out how you want the money to be used on the minor 's behalf . 3 -RRB- If no guardian is specified or trust created , the court may have to appoint a guardian at the time after death when the policy proceeds are collected . You may want to visit with your lawyer and life insurance agent to be sure that you have your policy set up in the way that you want it to , if a tragedy should happen .
There are many scenarios when the use of an irrevocable life insurance trust can be helpful . As the name says , it 's an irrevocable trust . Once the grantor contributes an item to the trust -LRB- e.g. life insurance death benefits -RRB- , they can not make any changes to the terms of the trust or take anything back out of it . It 's commonly used for estate planning purposes . When an ILIT is the owner and beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefits wo n't be included in the calculation of the gross estate of the insured - when life insurance is paid to an individual , they are included in the insured 's taxable estate . Another common scenario is to control how proceeds are distributed to minors , or in some cases a financially irresponsible adult . For example , you have an individual who is not yet a legal adult and stands to inherit a substantial amount of money from the death of the insured -LRB- e.g. parent -RRB- . An ILIT can be set up to have a percentage paid out at age 21 , then another percentage at age 25 , and the rest at age 30 -LRB- or whatever alternate payout structure is desired when the ILIT is set up -RRB- .
No . Home Insurance is not intended to cover a toilet leak . Typically the cost to repair such a leak is minor and Insurers expect the insured to take care of that on their own . Youcan get a warranty policy to cover major systems in the home . Home owners insurance covers areas like vandalism , fire , storm damage etc and tends to focus more on the structure of the home than the minor repairs that result from normal wear and tear . Plus most home owner polices have a deductible that must be paid before claims are paid . If the repair is less than the deductible it makes more financial sense to just fix it .
When life insurance proceeds are paid to a minor , it is usually required to have a financial guardian to oversee the distribution of funds to the child until they reach age 18 or age 21 , depending on the state of residence . This can be done ahead of time through a trust .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A Target Premium On A Universal Life Insurance Policy ?
When you buy universal life insurance , you have the choice to put in a higher premium than is required for your policy to last to a certain age . If you add more premium , your cash value may build more quickly , or your universal life policy may last more years . The target premium is usually the required premium for the policy to last a set number of years .
The target premium of a life insurance policy is the portion of the premium that is the reference point for compensation and could also be the premium to endow , to mature and sometime might relate to the guideline annual premium . The target premium is used in a variety of applications .
What is a target premium on a universal life insurance ? The target premium is the premium that will keep the policy in force to a given age at what is usually the current crediting rate . In other words if thing go unchanged of the life of the policy the target premium should hit the targeted goal duration wise .
What is a target premium on a universal life insurance ? The target premium is the premium that will keep the policy in force to a given age at what is usually the current crediting rate . In other words if thing go unchanged of the life of the policy the target premium should hit the targeted goal duration wise .
Adjustable premium life insurance is another name for Universal Life Insurance or UL for short . UL is not whole life and it 's not term . It 's a third version . Adjustable Premium UL has a target premium that is illustrated but you have the option of paying more or less than target and can adjust the premium that you pay anytime you want to . The adjustable premium has a huge downside . There is no guarantee that your premium will be enough to carry the policy until your death . Many UL policies will terminate from lack of premium and you will lose your insurance and all the money you paid in . Even if you pay your target premium every month , your policy can -LRB- and often does -RRB- lapse when you get older . I do n't recommend UL for the average person . It has it 's place in estate planning if you are working closely with an advisor every year and you have a real understanding of how UL works . But for the average consumer that wants to set it and forget it ... It 's a time bomb policy . I would stick to either term , whole - life , or a GUL which is a UL with a secondary no lapse guarantee . If you get the GUL , do NOT adjust your premium down or you will have turned your policy into a non-guaranteed UL .
All life insurance expires it is just a matter of when . Term life insurance is purchased by the expiration date . Term can be purchased by level premiums for 5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . Technically term life insurance will not expire on that date but the premiums will increase drastically in most cases ten fold and expire around age 80 or 85 . On permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance , the expiration is determined by the level of premium . On a whole life or universal life you have different levels of premium known as minimum , target and maximum . The target premium can be set for a certain age . Most common is age 95 or age 100 . There are several companies that will allow the target to be adjusted to an age range of 105 to 150 years old . Which it would be a miracle to live past age 150 , but if one did , the policy would expire .
Whole Life has set premiums that never go up , guaranteed cash values , and will be around when you need it as long as you pay the premiums . It also has what is called non-forfeiture values . If you stop making payments and the policy has cash value you can : 1 . Let the policy go on extended term which will provide the full face amount for a period until the cash value runs out . 2 . Take a reduced paid up policy for whatever the cash value will buy . 3 . Cash the policy in . Universal Life has Flexible Premiums , you can change the amount you put into the plan . Flexible Death Benefit , you can change the death benefit , reducing it or if your health is good increase the benefit without having to purchase a new policy . Universal Life has a guaranteed interest rate , not guaranteed cash value . Since the premiums are flexible the danger is in under funding the policy which will make the policy lapse , even if you are making premium payments . Universal Life is basically term insurance with a cash value side fund combined into one package . If there is not enough cash in the policy side fund to pay for the term insurance the policy lapses . It is important to make sure you are properly funding the Universal Life policy by paying at least the Target Premium . Each year you will receive an annual statement showing the cost of the term insurance and the amount of cash in the policy . Have your agent review this with you at least every two years to make sure it is performing as planned . As you can see , while the Universal Life has some attractive features , Whole Life is a safer more stable product .
Rolling target just refers to an agent compensation method for universal life insurance programs . It 's not a type of life insurance coverage . The commissions agents earn on their sale of a universal life product are based on the `` target premium '' of a policy because universal products feature flexible premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
I 'll add a bit to what Jeff has said because he made a very important point about Universal Life , that it 's a hybrid of whole life and term . Both whole life and Universal Life build cash value and have a separate portion that 's purely death benefit , but they differ greatly in how they operate internally . I 'll follow with explaining this difference . I 'm going to speak somewhat generally , so do n't kill me if a particular company 's product behaves a little differently . Whole Life - The internal cost of insurance is averaged over your life expectancy and stays the same year after year . Therefore , every year , the same amount of money goes toward the cost of insurance . The remainder goes to the cash account which grows by the insurance company adding money , or dividends , to the account . These dividends are set by the company based on the performance of it 's investments . It can change every year but most companies will guarantee a certain dividend . Premiums are level throughout the life of the policy and , if you pay your premium , your policy is guaranteed to be there for you . Universal Life - The internal cost of insurance increases every year based on your age just like term insurance does . The remainder goes into a cash account that the insurance company adds to as interest . This interest rate is also tied to the performance of their investments and will change from year to year . This means that , at the beginning of the policy , the internal cost of insurance is the lowest it will ever be and will increase every year . Premiums are flexible with a minimum amount due to cover expenses and the cost of insurance . Remainder goes into the cash account . There good and bad with both . With Whole life , your premiums will usually start out higher than with Universal , but they 'll never change and your policy is guaranteed to be there as long as you pay the premium . With Universal Life , the minimum premium will be much lower at inception but will increase every year as the cost insurance rises . This makes it extremely important to pay a target premium or more with universal life . That way , more money goes into the cash account to earn interest and offset cost of insurance increases as you get older . You can put more into the cash account and , therefore , it can grow more quickly , but there 's a flip side to that also . if you underfund it , the increasing cost of insurance can eat up all the cash value in later years and leave you with no cash and no death benefit . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and go through the entire process so he/she can put together the right program for you and your family .
Because of the way Universal Life works the answer to that question is usually yes but not always . Unlike Whole Life which has a set premium and is thus able to offer guaranteed cash values , a Universal Life policy does not have a set premium , the premium is flexible . You can add more to the policy or pay less into the policy . As long as your premium pays the expense charges and cost of insurance each year you will maintain your insurance.The problem with this is that these charges go up each year and eventually , like term , become unaffordable . That is why you must always put more into the policy than just the basic costs . A Universal Life has a Target Premium , meaning that if you put that amount into the policy it should be in good shape and there will be cash value . The more you put in , the greater the cash value .
Only term life insurance expires . Whole life and universal life actually endows . It depends on how the agent sets the policy up at point of application , but the premiums are based on minimum , target and maximum premiums . The illustrations will show the age that was targeted for the coverage to endow . The most common ages are 95 , 100 , 105 and 121 years old . The whole life policy will endow at the specified age which means the premiums will begin to exceed the death benefit . At this point , you can take the cash value , you can continue paying premiums to allow the cash value to grow or you can stop paying premiums and allow the money to grow and leave your beneficiary the cash as a death benefit . Whole life insurance will not just simply expire .
Yes , whole life insurance can pay for itself at a point if set up properly . There are 3 ways to set premiums for a whole life plan . They are minimum premium to keep it in force , target premium to have full use out of the cash value and maximum premium which keeps the policy from becoming a modified endowment contracts . So if your whole life is set at target premium , at some point you will have enough cash value to have `` paid up '' life insurance for your life span . Whole life policies can be tricky , I recommend using a trusted life insurance broker to avoid common mistakes .
When you buy universal life insurance , you have the choice to put in a higher premium than is required for your policy to last to a certain age . If you add more premium , your cash value may build more quickly , or your universal life policy may last more years . The target premium is usually the required premium for the policy to last a set number of years .
Universal Life is a unique product . The advantages of a Universal Life Policy are : Flexible Premiums , you can put more into the policy to act as a savings and enhance cash accumulation . You can skip payments as long as there is enough in the cash value to continue the insurance . You can decrease the face amount or increase the face amount -LRB- as long as your health qualifies -RRB- . It has a competitive interest rate . It is a good way to get a lot of insurance for a lower premium than whole Life . The disadvantages : It must be funded properly . Because you can skip or put less into the policy than the Target Premium , the policy could lose its death benefit . Picture a bucket of money . The bucket has a hole in it and it is dripping . If the water -LRB- money -RRB- going into the bucket is greater than the water going out of the bucket , you are OK . But if you do not have enough going into the bucket and it is draining faster than being filled , then the water will eventually run out . When that happens the insurance will cease . Universal Life is a good product , but not for everyone .
The target premium of a life insurance policy is the portion of the premium that is the reference point for compensation and could also be the premium to endow , to mature and sometime might relate to the guideline annual premium . The target premium is used in a variety of applications .
The length of time that a universal life policy is in force is determined by the payment pattern of the owner of the policy . If the policy is continuously underfunded , it will lapse at a relatively early age , sometimes in the early 50s . However , if guidelines and targets are followed a universal life plan can last up to the time of death .
Most life insurance policies pay a commission to the agent who sold the policy . The commission is usually a percent of the `` commissionable premium '' . The commissionable part of the premium may or may not exclude policy fees , and with universal life there is a target premium beyond which no commission is paid . The commission is usually paid within a month after the policy is placed , although some companies pay faster than others . If the insured drops the policy during the first year , some or all the commission may be charged back from the agent and returned to the life insurance company .
Yes , whole life and universal life insurance policies are considered permanent life insurance and do accumulate cash value that can be used for numerous things . The typical whole life insurance policy takes 5 to 7 years to accumulate cash as the first few years cover the cost of insurance . There are ways to maximize your premiums to build cash value if that is your goal . An experienced insurance agent can show you your options to minimum fund , target fund and maximum fund your whole life insurance policy . Your cash value can later be used to pay up your premiums , retirement funds , children college fund or even cash for a critical illness .
The short answer is once you have accumulated enough cash to borrow from , but there is much more to it . First , you must have a cash value or permanent life insurance policy such as a whole life or universal life insurance policy in order to borrow funds . If you purchase your coverage at target premium , in the first 5 to 7 years all of your premium dollars will most likely fund your life portion of the policy . This means cash value really begins to accumulate significantly in the following years . There is a limit to the amount of cash that can be borrowed and leave the policy intact , so the death benefit will be paid at your death . I recommend sitting down with your agent to discuss your options before withdrawing cash from your cash value life insurance policy .
A flexible premium life insurance policy is a cash value policy which allows the policy holder to pay flexible premiums in lieu of one set premium . The policy is made up of annual renewable term insurance bundled with a cash accumulation account usually touting high accumulations of cash many years in the future . This is what entices many to purchase this type of policy but buyer beware ! In this policy the cost of the insurance increases annually and when the cost of the insurance passes the premium that is being paid the cash values begin subsidizing the increased cost of coverage . If premiums are not increased the policy will collapse sometime in the future . To keep this from happening the policy holder must pay a target premium which is usually much higher than the quoted premium when the policy was issued . Again , the policy holder is paying more than he needs to be paying for the coverage . A better alternative to this is purchasing a level term policy and investing the savings outside the policy in an IRA . This is called split-funding and will give the policy holder control of his cash values .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Offer Health Insurance To Employees ?
Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . You can secure the quotes and buy the plan through an independent agent . Given the complexities and the number of moving parts involved in group coverage , you want to work with someone who has a strong background in group coverage .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
No American employer is required to provide health insurance to their employees . What the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- imposes is an employer mandate that employers of certain sizes must offer their employees health insurance that meets certain minimum essential benefit coverage requirements and an affordability level to the employee . If such an employer chooses not to offer group health insurance to their employees the employer will be subject to an employer mandate tax penalty charged on a per employee basis . In 2015 employers with 100 + employees will be subject to this requirement with the size threshold dropping to 50 + employees in 2016 . Employers with less than 50 employees are not required to offer coverage . While on the face of it the employer mandate would seem to be an incentive for larger employers to offer health insurance to their employees it 's true effects are yet to be seen and are quite debatable . For example , the cost of the tax penalty is generally far less than the cost of insuring an employee thus perhaps creating an incentive to take the lower cost of the tax penalty and to send your employees to the health insurance marketplaces to buy their own coverage .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
There remains a lot of confusion over this issue in the wake of the passing of the health care reform law -LRB- ObamaCare , the Affordable Care Act -RRB- and justifiably so . Technically speaking , ObamaCare does not force any employer to offer health insurance to their employees , their is no criminal penalty for failure to do so . That point made , the Affordable Care Act consists of a mix of tax incentives and tax penalties to supposedly induce employers to provide health insurance for their employees . First of all , for employers with 2 to49 employees there are no tax penalties at all for failure to provide health insurance to their employees . A tax credit is offered but with enough limitations associated with it that only a tiny percentage of small employers have ever taken advantage of it . For employers who are at and above the 50 full time and/or full time equivalent employee level they will be the ones who will be faced with tax penalties for failing to provide health insurance and/or failing to provide affordable health insurance to their employees . The first employers to be impacted will be those with 100 or more full time employees in 2015 . Then , starting in 2016 , employers in the 50 to 99 employee range will be subject to the same tax penalty . The tax penalty will be $ 2000 per employee per year and will be a non-deductible business expense . Not surprisingly , the situation is more complicated than I have just described but there is not space here to go into all the details involved . Suffice it to say , this is an issue of great concern to many employers , especially ones who have not offered health insurance to their employees or a large segment of their employees in the past . The restaurant , hospitality and trucking industries are some common examples of industries that can expect to be adversely impacted financially by the tax penalty . For consultation on this issue please feel free to contact me .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
What type of jobs offer the best health insurance ? Well it depends . The choice for an employer prior to the ACA to provide health insurance was completely voluntary and any size business might offer quality benefits . Sometimes assuming a large employer offers the best plans could be a mistake . Often better benefits than average were offered by businesses that needed to attract and retain quality employees . The high tech field because of demand , offered great benefits to employees to help keep the best employees there . With the ACA things will change considerably for business that uses health benefits to attract employees . The Cadillac tax on employers who provide too `` good '' of benefits for their employees will reduce health benefits to a national standard that a business would be forced to pay extra taxes in penalty if they wanted to do more for their employees .
As of today no one has to offer health insurance ! That will change on January 1 , 2015 when employers with 100 or more employees will have to offer health insurance to their employees or pay a penalty -LRB- tax -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- requires employers to offer health insurance to employees and dependents that are children but does not require employers to offer health insurance to spouses of employees . On January 1 , 2016 employers with 50-99 employers will be required to offer health insurance .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
Yes . Absent a collective bargaining agreement with a labor union , which are increasingly rare , an employer makes a voluntary decision to offer health insurance and other benefits to their employees . There has never been a legal requirement in our nation for an employer to offer health insurance to their employees . The Affordable Care Act contains provisions that can apply tax penalties to employers above certain group sizes for not offering health insurance or the approved level of coverage and it offers inducements in the form of tax credits to smaller employers to provide health insurancebut even this law does not force an employer to provide health insurance to their employees . So , generally speaking , an employer is free to not offer health insurance to their employees or to terminate an existing group health insurance plan that they have had in effect . Indeed , the higher costs imposed by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have already had the perverse effect of pushing some employers to the decision to cancel their group health plans .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
Some will and some wo n't . Employer 's offer health insurance and other benefits to attract and retain quality employees , reduce turnover and to reduce absenteeism . Also , many employer 's feel a moral obligation to offer health insurance and employer sponsored health insurance is a deductible business expense so it does offer tax advantages . That said , with the introduction of the health insurance marketplaces and advanced premium tax subsidies for individual health insurance under Obamacare , these have added a new consideration for some employers . Depending upon the overall income levels of a particular employer 's workforce -LRB- a business with a lot of low to moderate income employees -RRB- it is possible that offering group health insurance could now be a disadvantage to many employees . This is because they may qualify for premium subsidies in the government marketplaces that actually make the cost of insurance less for them than having it provided by their employer . This is a very complicated issue that has a unique answer for each employer . If you would like an analysis of whether offering or continuing to offer group health insurance is right for your workforce please feel free to contact me .
Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . It 's impossible to say what the `` average '' cost per employee is for health insurance . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of the business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you 'll need to contact a health insurance agent - working with an independent one will allow you to shop for quotes from multiple companies in one place . Having too many `` hands in the cookie jar '' can sometimes make things confusing . Feel free to contact me with any questions .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
Beginning January 1 , 2015 employers with 100 or more employers have a choice to offer health insurance to their employees and child dependents or pay a penalty -LRB- tax -RRB- . If they choose to offer health insurance they must offer a health plan that meets the minimum coverage requirement , the employees can not pay more than 9.56 % of their income for their portion and the employer must pay at least 50 % of the employee only premium . The other option is to pay a tax of $ 2,000 per employee after the first 80 employees in 2015 and after the first 30 employees in 2016 . The penalty or tax is not tax deductible .
No one is required to offer health insurance , but employers are strongly encouraged to offer it as a way of attracting people to come work for them . Depending on how many employees there are for a given company , the employer may be subject to employer shared responsibility payments if they do n't offer group coverage and meet enrollment requirements . Employers also often offer group health insurance because they can get certain tax deductions and tax credits for doing so and enrolling employees . If you want to look into setting up a group health plan to offer your employees -LRB- or want to review your existing coverage to see if something better is available -RRB- , you want to work with an experienced health insurance broker . There 's many moving parts to group coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of the products available and can help design a policy that is suitable to your needs , your budget , and will offer great coverage to your staff . Please let me know if I can be of assistance . Thanks very much .
The correct plan for your business is determined by a number of factors . Here are some of them ; How many employees in the business ? How many employees are family ? Is the business profitable and do employees earn a good living ? Do the owners want a maximum contribution plan for themselves . Are there key employees besides the owners ? How old is the ownership and the employee population ? And there are more questions ; How profitable is the company and how long has it been profitable ? And so on . So whether you put in place a 401k , profit sharing plan or defined benefit plan , these questions need to be answered .
This has been a controversial area for several years as I presume you are asking about how to reimburse employees for the cost of individual health insurance . There had been a lot of activity which was embraced by a number of employers in past years to reimburse their employees for the cost of individual health insurance through the use of a Health Reimbursement Account -LRB- HRA -RRB- and making it a deductible business expense no different than an employer contribution to a group health insurance plan . In early 2013 the DOL and IRS issued statements that virtually every benefits professional recognized as being definitive in stating that this practice was not allowed . If an employer does not want to offer a group health insurance plan but wants to assist their employees in purchasing individual health insurance then the only practical way to do this appears to be by grossing up their pay by some amount . Of course , this is no different than giving the employees a pay raise from a tax perspective because that is exactly what you are doing . Also , this well intentioned action by the employer may have the unintended consequence of reducing or eliminating the amount of the Advanced Premium Tax subsidy that the employees might qualify for in the government health insurance marketplaces . But it is now clear than any employer support for employees purchasing their own health insurance can only be done on a post-tax basis . Depending upon a given group 's circumstances this may be a viable option to consider and is being done by some employers . This is an approach that needs to be handled with care and you should seek guidance regarding the applicability of this approach to your company 's specific situation . If you would like to learn more please feel free to contact me .
No , statistically around 99 % large companies in the US -LRB- 200 + employees -RRB- offer health benefits , about 96 % of medium companies -LRB- 50-199 employees -RRB- offer health benefits , and about 92 % of small companies -LRB- < 49 employees -RRB- offer health benefits . There may be a significant impact on the small employer statistics as state and federal exchanges become available . However I can confidently say that any such statistical shift in the small employer health benefits market will most likely be a short term -LRB- perhaps 3-5 year -RRB- variation that will in time reflect a very small impact in the % of small businesses offering health benefits . The complex structuring options and technical details will render the small business exchanges as effective at delivering optimal results as online tax software is in helping someone who is not well versed in accounting manage pay-roll and state/federal tax obligations/deductions . Also the businesses who do not provide meaningful benefit programs to their employees will find it hard to compete with the other companies who are able to leverage such programs to provide them with a distinct competitive advantage . That being said the exchanges will revolutionize the marketplace of individual health insurance policies .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Supplemental Life Insurance Mean ?
Supplemental Life Insurance is group life insurance offered to employees above and beyond what they receive as part of their company benefits . It is usually paid for by the employee . Supplemental Life Insurance may not be portable , i.e. , it may not be able to be taken with you when you leave your job . So while looking at purchasing supplemental life insurance through your employer , you might also look at purchasing some individual life insurance that you know you can hang onto for the rest of your life .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Yes , Medigap and a Medicare Supplement are actually pseudonyms , two different terms that mean the exact same thing . Medigap refers to a policy that `` fills in the gaps '' of what Medicare does not pay , much like a Medicare Supplement , which is intended to `` supplement payment for items that Medicare does not pay in full . '' Either way you say it , both terms mean the same thing .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
Video Transcript : What is supplemental life insurance ? Supplemental life insurance can be extra insurance that you have above and beyond either your group plan at work or individually-purchased life insurance . If you purchased this and you need more , some people look at supplemental life insurance to augment what they already have . You may want to look at this in 2 ways '' ` Would I like to have more coverage or would I like to have a supplemental retirement income plan , an extra cash value contract , that can generate withdrawals to basis and policy loans to gain tax-free , as long as I keep the policy in force for the life of the policy insured ? ' If I 'm looking at it as a supplemental income play or I 'm looking at it as a supplemental death benefit , supplemental life insurance can be a great adjunct to what I already have , either by group or by my individual purchase .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Nothing . Medigap and Medicare Supplement Insurance mean the same thing . Two different terms that describe the same product . A Medigap Plan -LRB- or Medicare Supplement Insurance -RRB- is designed to cover what original Medicare Part A & B does not . Medicare along with a Medigap Plan/Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . There is no network so you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . If they take Medicare they will take the supplement . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
Medicare supplement plans premiums can vary from company to company . It 's important to remember that coverage for medicare supplement plans -LRB- medigap plans -RRB- have been standardized by the Federal government . This means ABC 's Plan F offers the same basic benefit as XYZ 's plan F. It 's important to speak with a broker who represents a number of companies , because paying more for a medigap plan does not mean you are getting more , it just means you are paying too much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
As far as I know , any carrier that offers Medicare supplement plans in your state will also include plan F. For a lot of reasons , Medigap plan F is the most popular plan sold -LRB- and purchased -RRB- . Every statistic I have seen shows Medicare supplement plan F participation in excess of 50 % and usually closer to 70 % . In other words , for every 100 Medicare supplement plans bought in a state , 50 - 70 are plan F . While F is the most popular plan , it does not mean it has the best value . Most of my Georgia Medicare supplement clients purchase plan G and enjoy saving $ 300 or more each year vs. what they were paying for plan F with another carrier .
Best means different things to different people . To some people best means lowest price . To others it means it accepts their health conditions when other companies might decline you . I 'm going to assume that by best you mean the highest level of coverage regardless of price . That is an easy question to answer . The Plan F Medicare Supplement is the highest level of coverage you can get of all Medicare Supplements . Many companies sell it and they all sell exactly the same thing -LRB- required by law -RRB- but they do not charge the same price . Have your insurance broker show you the rate for all the top companies so you can buy your Plan F cheaper and save . Have him also explain Plans G and plan N which can also be a better value for many people .
How much supplemental life insurance do you need ? Going to depend on what your desires are towards protecting your family in case of your early death . So the answer really is how much do you feel you need ? The question I have would be if you are healthy , why would you go with a supplemental plan when you could qualify for a personal plan that you own and control ? Supplimental life is a great deal if you are of questionable health . Usually there are few questions and minimal underwriting , which means the product has been priced assuming poor health to begin with . Remember more questions means lower price . Fewer questions mean they priced the insurance as if you already answered `` yes '' to the question .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Best means different things to different people . To some people best means lowest price . To others it means it accepts their health conditions when other companies might decline you . I 'm going to assume that by best you mean the highest level of coverage regardless of price . That is an easy question to answer . The Plan F Medicare Supplement is the highest level of coverage you can get of all Medicare Supplements . Many companies sell it and they all sell exactly the same thing -LRB- required by law -RRB- but they do not charge the same price . Plan G is always a better value than Plan F is . You only pay a deductible of $ 146 one per year but you can save $ 200 to $ 300 in annual premium when compared to plan F. Have your insurance broker show you the rate for all the top companies so you can buy your Plan F cheaper and save . Have him also explain Plans G and plan N which can also be a better value for many people .
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Medicare Advantage plans can be a an HMO or PPO . However , Medicare Advantage/HMO/PPO mean almost the same thing once you are on Medicare , meaning they are all a Medicare Advantage plan . One of the common statements from people turning 65 is , `` I want a PPO '' , because that is what they knew before they went on Medicare . However , it means something way different now that they are on Medicare . A Medicare Supplement is the only plan that does n't have a network and that gives you the greatest flexibility in deciding who you go see for care .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Sue My Auto Insurance Company ?
I am not an attorney , so this should NOT be construed as legal advice , however , my belief is that it would depend on why you are considering suing them . There is normally a requirement in a policy that claims issues be resolved through an arbitration process between you and your insurance company . However , if you have been wronged in some other way , it is certainly possible . It is normally much less expensive to start with your state department of insurance . They are a consumer advocate and should help you make sure your rights are protected .
You can not sue someone for not having auto insurance . You can sue a person if the persons or party caused bodily injury and/or property damage to you . Auto insurance would normally cover the persons or party in this situation which is why you would carry auto insurance in the first place . However if the persons or party does not have the coverage you may take them to court to seek restitution . But you can not sue the persons or party just for not having auto insurance .
You can be sued by an auto insurance company . If you are involved in an accident and determined to be at fault but do not have any or enough insurance to cover the claims , the company can sue you for the amount paid to their client . A company could also sue if a claim was paid to you and it was later determined to have been overpaid or fraud . The company can sue to get the money that should not have been paid .
Yes and auto insurance carrier at their discretion can bring a law suit against you . Auto insurance companies only sue to recover their loss and no more . So for example you caused an accident and they person you hit used his or her insurance to pay for the damage to their car because you had no insurance . The insurance company may want to recover what they paid out since their client was not at fault . Therefore the insurance company could take you to court to recover the monies spent for the repairs . No lets take it a step further . Say you were the one who was hit and were also injured . Your insurance company if they did not pay for your injuries will not sue for injury , pain and suffering and so on since the insurance company did not suffer a loss in this area . Again , insurance companies will only try to recover their own loss .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
This one is really dependent upon the circumstances and where you live . I can only speak to how Michigan will treat it . Since we 're a No-Fault state , if your car is damaged , your insurance will cover the damage to your car -LRB- if you have physical damage coverage -RRB- . If you do n't carry physical damage coverage you can sue for up to $ 1,000 in small claims court . Now , most people in Michigan have coverage for this under their policies and will pay it out without going to court . You simply contact their company , explain the circumstances and submit a police report showing their driver is at fault . They usually pay these very quickly . If it 's not for physical damage to a car , you may be able to do the same thing , but the outcome may be very different . If it 's for property damage or an injury , they may or may not work with you . It 's very possible you may have to sue the other driver to recover any damages . Remember , their insurance company represents their driver , not you . I would advise my clients to get an estimate on any damage to a car and to consult a doctor with any injury . Then , depending on what you find out , make a determination on whether it 's worth pursuing . Any time you sue , there 's a lot of time and energy involved and the outcome is not certain . You need to be able to put a dollar amount on it before you proceed . Get your ducks in a row first , then you 'll be in a much better position .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
A homeowners policy is a legal contract . That contract may include a provision that says that you can not sue the company but must arbitrate . You should consult with an attorney . In most states you would still be free to sue . You would basically sue the company for not performing their obligations under the contract .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
The reason why landlords want insurance is to protect themselves for either property loss or a liability suit . If you are a tenant in a commercial building and a client of yours gets hurt on your premises then that client may potentially sue you . If you have no insurance the client may sue the building owner just because it 's the landlords building even though the tenant may be the party who caused the loss . Same is true for private residences . The landlord does not want to take on a suit because your friend fell down in your home . Now for the record , just because the victim goes after the landlord does not mean you are off the hook as a tenant . If the landlords insurance ends up having to pay a claim you can almost surely bet they are coming after you so my suggestion is carry the insurance . There are way to many upsides and virtually no down side .
If the Company is paying its employees to drive the vehicles , the company must have a Commercial Auto Policy . The commercial auto policy also must include non-owned vehicle coverage when your employees are driving the car . The customer can not sign an agreement to only sue the driver because the insurance company the customer has is required to act on behalf of the customer regarding subrogation . The company 's insurance will be responsible for any damage or theft while the vehicle is in the company employee 's possesion . Keith Prim - Dallas - 214-435-0791
That is a great question ! The simple fact is that you can sue anybody , or any company . All you will need is a competent lawyer , a good reason to sue , and a solid winnable case . If you have all of those things , then you can bring suit against your insurance company . Good luck . Thanks for asking !
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
Yes , you can sue a health insurance company . But you should have a very good reason to sue , retain an excellent attorney and have VERY deep pockets because it 's going to cost you time and an incredible amount of money . If you believe you have a great cause , consult an attorney . You never know what may happen .
An insurance policy is a legal contract . A legal contract always requires consideration . That means money must change hands . I could promise you a free trip to the moon but if you dont pay me anything the most you could sue me for would be breach of promise . You couldnt say I broke a contract even if my promise was in writing . Insurance is based on the idea that the premium is paid prior to the start of coverage . I doubt you will find anyone that will truly provide insurance without a down-payment and if you do , check to make sure you arent taking out a loan to do so .
Landlords are concerned about liability arising from your possession of their property . If a guest of yours slips inside the unit and is injured they will certainly sue you but may also sue the landlord . This is why the landlord often requires that you maintain a renters policy that will address suits arising from personal injury and physical damage . By having you secure a policy and name them as additional insured they are less vulnerable to lawsuit . Additionally , tenants rarely fully appreciate that if something happens to the unit and your personal property is damaged or destroyed , the landlord doesnt have any liability . If you have a renters policy there is some money available to restore what you have lost .
Consult with state law to make sure that is permissible . Your lender will take a dim view of your driving an uninsured vehicle . Normally they require insurance to protect their interests in their collateral . If you can pay the injured and repair the damage to all the vehicles in a collision then you probably dont need auto insurance . Oh did I mention that everyone involved can sue you into bankruptcy .
Based upon my limited knowledge and experience , I believe that it is possible to sue your homeowners insurance carrier . How effective this action would be is another story . If you have a dispute with your carrier , you could always contact the commissioner of insurance in your state to file a complaint .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Does The Military Have A Retirement Plan ?
The Military does offer three retirement plans . The one that you would receive is based on your DIEMS -LRB- Date of Entry Into Military Service -RRB- . They are called Final Pay , High-3 , and REDUX . Benefits are calculated based on your number of years in service , the year you will retire , basic monthly pay received , a multiplier , and cost of living factor .
No , the Military 's retirement plan is not a qualified plan ; it is a public sector retirement plan that is not covered by ERISA . Military retirement does not offer a vesting schedule and does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , which provides security for failed pension plans .
No , military retirement is not a qualified plan . It does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , it does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and the money received through their retirement plan is considered wages and not pension monies . Therefore , the retirement plan offered by the military is non-qualified .
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
The following people are eligible to apply for USAA Auto insurance : Active , retired and honorably separated officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. military . Officer candidates in commissioning programs -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . Adult children whose eligible parents have or had a USAA auto or property insurance product . Widows and widowers of USAA members who have or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy . If you or your spouse served in the military , you will need to provide the following information for that person : Date of birth Social Security number USAA number Military enlistment , commissioning , retirement or separation date
The Military does offer three retirement plans . The one that you would receive is based on your DIEMS -LRB- Date of Entry Into Military Service -RRB- . They are called Final Pay , High-3 , and REDUX . Benefits are calculated based on your number of years in service , the year you will retire , basic monthly pay received , a multiplier , and cost of living factor .
Some life insurance does cover active military but some does not . Many companies wo n't issue a policy to you if you are active duty . Look for companies life the Armed Forces Benefit Association/5-Star Life which specialize in military families . Also the United States Automobile Association/USAA works mainly with military families .
A military pension is a non-qualified retirement plan . It is provided in the public sector , does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and is not under ERISA . The FAS US Military annuity payment -LRB- distribution -RRB- from form 1099 is non-qualified .
Their recent T.V. commercials are pretty good , with the people of all ages , who state that they have a USAA policy through various military service and family connections . The first level of those who are eligible for their policies are active , retired and/or enlisted U.S. military personnel . Also eligible are Officer Candidate personnel , such as ROTC and other military service candidate programs . Additionally , the adult -LRB- 18 + age -RRB- children of parents who either had or currently have a USAA auto or home product and widows or widowers of former USAA auto and home policyholders are eligible .
Yes the military offers life insurance through -LRB- USAA -RRB- which is a good place to start being they specialize in the military . There are other companies that deal with military personnel also such as Peterson International they deal with high risk clients such as military , football players . construction workers etc. . John Cole Virtual Financial Group Recruiter / Manager Living Benefits .
That is a great question ! Regular life insurance companies will not insure anyone that is in the military , or in an area where military action is likely . Insurance companies are all about the risk of loss , and being in the military greatly increases that risk . As a result , the federal Government offers life insurance for the members of the military , so that their families can be protected also . That is what Servicemen Group Life is . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
Active military and National Guard are covered by TRICARE , a health care program for service members and their families around the world . TRICARE is the major part of the Military Health System , a system that utilizes combined resources of military hospitals and clinics with civilian health care networks , as well as a combination of different coverage options depending on where the person is currently stationed . TRICARE coverage does meet the requirements for having minimum essential benefits as called for under the Affordable Care Act .
No , while USAA does offer many different types of insurance products , USAA does not offer Disability Insurance . If associated with the military and having a disability incurred to military service , the VA will pay disability benefits . If you are looking to purchase Disability Insurance while working in the private sector , there are many other Life Insurance companies through which you can purchase it .
Members of the National Guard have access to inexpensive health insurance through the military 's Tricare system that combines the health resources of the military with networks of civilian health care professionals , institutions , pharmacies and suppliers to provide affordable access to high-quality health care services around the world . While it can be a major money-saving benefit for military families , it 's a very complex system with countless terms and conditions . If you are eligible , you should take time to understand their eligibility and enroll in the plan that best meets your needs .
Im not sure if there is any free coverage . If there is it is a small amount . But all members of the military are eligible for subsidized coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs . The program is called SGLI -LRB- Service-members Group Life Insurance -RRB- . It is super cheap and all members of the military should take advantage of it . It is a flat rate regardless of age/tobacco use/health . $ 400k costs $ 27/m When you retire you can convert it to the veterans group life plan . WEBSITELINK
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
To get USAA insurance , you must be a member of USAA . To be eligible to be a member of USAA , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from the US military . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , . 4 -RRB- You are a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
As a former veteran myself , I remember having some of the best health care around . Military families usually have insurance called Tricare . Its close to free and it works great . The system works for Active Military as well as retirees .
yes , you can purchase life insurance through the Veterans Adminstration . This could be important life insuruance but are we assuming that the tendency to preclude `` military action '' in standard life insurance policies is not also included in those policies ? You better read the fine print and I would require the agent to give me a written statement that if I am killed in Military action '' then my family is protected as stated on page so and so in the policy and you need to have this discussion with your significant other
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Offers The Best Long Term Care Insurance ?
It 's difficult to say that one company is `` the best '' . There are definitely factors you can look at such as rating , who has the biggest market share , etc. . Since LTC has many options to choose from , I suggest also looking at the carrier 's options . For example , some companies offer a `` Shared Care '' benefit , whereby you can use your partner 's benefit when yours are exhausted .
The best Long Term Care insurance for one person may not be the best Long Term Care policy for another . Look at the rating of the company and the features of the policies they offer , in addition to see if they are priced competitively , their history of rate increases , and whether they have had many complaints against them . Above all , it is helpful to contact a Long Term Care broker -LRB- may Life insurance brokers also sell Long Term Care insurance -RRB- to help you find the best Long Term Care policy for you .
It is always with the best of intentions that I attempt to be objective , but that being said , there are not many long term care insurance companies -LRB- LTCi -RRB- left in the extended care market place . Perhaps there are a half a dozen worth your consideration . Genworth is one of the top LTCi companies in the U.S. . They generally rank well in annual premium cost against the competitors and offer excellent policy language in their contractual definitions .
Who offers the best long term care ? Again it 's going to depend on what a person wants that coverage to be . There are several very good long term care companies . The best thing to do is decide what is important to you as the buyer and then have quotes from several companies to compare from .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
The best Long Term Care insurance for one person may not be the best Long Term Care policy for another . Look at the rating of the company and the features of the policies they offer , in addition to see if they are priced competitively , their history of rate increases , and whether they have had many complaints against them . Above all , it is helpful to contact a Long Term Care broker -LRB- may Life insurance brokers also sell Long Term Care insurance -RRB- to help you find the best Long Term Care policy for you .
The cost of long term care exceeds the expectation of most people . Long term care can easily erode a substantial amount of money . Because traditional life insurance doesnt address the cost of long term care , these policies are important . The cost for long term care is increasing every year . Companies that once offered Long Term Care have withdrawn from the market . In response some life insurance companies are offering limited living benefits which would act like Long Term Care insurance by paying out part of the death benefit before death occurs .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
When Is Disability Insurance Worth It ?
when is disability insurance worth it ? When you have something to lose . Insurance of any type is simply protection from loss . If you have passive income at a level high enough to maintain the lifestyle you want , then no , probably disability insurance is not for you . However , if your lifestyle depends on your income , and you have nothing without your income , would n't insuring your paycheck be a good idea ?
I think you will find the day that disability insurance is worth it will be the day you have a medical injury or illness and a physician tells you that you will never be able to work again . Those are truly the days that clients are truly grateful they paid those pesky premiums all those years . That day when you realize at least you have an income stream to live while dealing with this type of devastating news .
Insurance ... . be it Disability Insurance or Long Term Care Insurance or Life Insurance or whatever type of insurance that you buy ... . is not really worth the money put into it unless you need it . But if you do need it , it is beyond worth it . Also , the peace of mind that having insurance gives has a value . So Aflac Disability Insurance is worth it if you become disabled . And if you do n't , it may be worth it to you to not have had to worry about the possibility of being without an income for any significant length of time .
Is Supplemental Disability Insurance worth it ? That is a great question . If you need almost all your income to support your family 's lifestyle and home , then it certainly could be worth it for you . Group Disability Insurance can end up paying you only 45 % of your income , after taxes , and has restrictive features that a Supplemental Disability Insurance policy will expand upon . Also , Supplemental Disability Insurance can bump the amount you would get paid during a disability to 70 % to 80 % of your income . Finally , Supplemental Disability Insurance is generally portable whereas group DI policies generally are not portable . So purchasing Supplemental Life Insurance while you are still insurable can ensure having Disability coverage for the rest of your life .
Is disability insurance worth having ? The answer depends on the individual . What we 're talking about with disability insurance is paycheck protection . Disability insurance does n't pay for a medical claim , at least not directly . Disability insurance simply creates a pot of money to use as you would with your paycheck . It is up to the individual to decide the worth of protecting their paycheck . Maybe if there 's passive income or massive savings the need for disability insurance may not be that great . But , if you 're not in that position financially , you should think long and hard about disability insurance .
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
Is Life Insurance really worth it ? That depends entirely on the individual involved . For some the idea of protecting their family if they do n't make it home some night is worth a great deal . For others not so much , as it depends on your relationships in life . Even as single young man , I bought life insurance . Why ? cause it was `` worth '' it to me to make sure that my mom could deal with the clean up of the mess I left behind without having to spend the money she worked hard for herself . It was `` worth '' it to me to make a terrible situation that my mom might have to face not a financial hardship at the same time . Later on , it was `` worth '' it to me to have coverage for my wife and kids . This is really a personal answer for each person . I ca n't tell anybody why it 's worth it to them , that has to be their own choice .
There are several ways to look at that . If you are still living the death benefit is not worth anything currently . But the cash value has a definite worth . The cash surrender value is what most people would consider the worth of you life insurance . But there is also a reduced paid up amount that you could opt for that would possibly be worth more to you .
As mentioned previously , while net worth is a factor , income is the primary determinant for underwriting the amount of life insurance coverage allowed -LRB- applied for plus inforce amounts -RRB- . Above age 70 , net worth is very important in determining maximum coverage allowed . Net worth , income and the premium for the requested coverage are considered together using different formulas . Generally , the maximum total coverage allowed will be 50 % of net worth .
The only time disability insurance is worth buying is when you become disabled . Otherwise it is a waste of money . The catch is no one knows when they can or will become disabled it is an absolute must in your financial planning . Statistically we are 8 times more likely to become disabled than to die at an earlier age . Disability insurance for those whose greatest asset is their ability to earn money is a must .
`` Worth '' having something really is based upon one 's own point of view and circumstances . As an insurance professional who is responsible for providing advice and service to my clients , frankly I believe that dollar for dollar , Renters Insurancecan be invaluable and is certainly `` worth '' the cost . Look , you work hard to obtain the things you buy , so obviously , you have already made the decision that these things are `` worth '' having . If you came home one day and your apartment or the house you were renting was completey destroyed and all those personal items that you valued were gone , I suspect you would not be questionning the worth of your renters ' policy .
Long term care insurance is not worth the cost if it causes you to cut back on groceries or medication or other essentials needed for a healthy and happy life . If you have very little savings , assets or investments , long term care insurance may also not be worth the cost . If you can afford it , you might want to buy long term care insurance for the options it offers you for your care . However , you would not need it to protect your assets if you do not have assets to protect . Long term care insurance IS worth the cost for those who have a lot to lose if they would have to pay expensive nursing home , assisted living , in home , or other care costs for an extended period of time . It also is worth the cost for those who have strong feelings about being able to pay for the type of care they want , rather than rely on where Medicaid allows .
If you have a critical illness in your future , and will have received a lump sum of money to get you through that process of treatment and -LRB- hopefully -RRB- recovery , you will have thought it is worth it . No one knows the future . To some , having the knowledge that such a benefit would be provided if they are diagnosed with a life threatening illness , is worth it . To others , that is not such a big deal . Whether it is worth getting critical illness insurance or not is really a person decision . That being said , there are many more survivors of critical illnesses now than in the past . So it is a risk worth considering .
Whether Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is worth it to you depends on whether you can survive at least 5 months without your salary , or would be willing to work at a job you can do vs a job you were trained for . Both of these must occur before being able to get Social Security Disability . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can pay approximately 60 % of your salary while recovering from a long illness of slow healing injury until you can get your old type of job back . That is worth it , to most people .
The only time it is worth purchasing disability insurance or any insurance for that matter is when you need it at claim time . Unfortunately , no one knows when that time comes . Disability insurance is a must if you earn an income to live . Statistically you are 8 times more likely to become disabled by an illness or injury than to die from that illness or injury . If you can fit disability in your budget , buy it before it is too late .
Disability insurance is a way to protect your income if you were to become sick or disabled . If you were unable to work and earn an income because of a sickness or injury , a disability insurance policy would pay you a portion of your income so you could continue to live the lifestyle you are accustomed to . Think of how much your ability to earn an income is actually worth . If you make $ 40,000 per year and are planning to work for another 25 years , If you multiply your income by the number of years you will work then your ability to earn an income is worth $ 1,000,000 -LRB- $ 40,000 X 25 years -RRB- . The actual figure will be much higher because you will most likely get raises .
When is life insurance worth it ? I suppose that depends who you ask ! If you ask the insured , the answer may be never since they never see the proceeds . Of course , the peace of mind they get knowing loved ones are protected may make the purchase `` worth it . '' Beneficiaries that are able to replace lost income or pay estate or other taxes , may also feel it was `` worth it . ''
Either you are referring to the best disability insurance company or the best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance . There are several excellent disability companies in the disability market place . One of the best is The Standard . The best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance is to determine if you can expense the premium as a business deduction and apply for 80 % of your compensation . While it is true that any benefits received will be subject to ordinary income tax , a deduction today is worth the risk of taxable event in the future . Nondeductible disability protects up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free distribution of benefits . If youre in a high tax bracket , the spread in benefits -LRB- 80 % versus 60 % -RRB- and the savings in the annual deduction are incentives to expense the premium if you have a legitimate business . Keep in mind that you can also buy disability insurance to cover your qualified plan contributions as well .
Personal Disability Insurance is worth it if you need your income to live the life you are accustomed to , or to provide for others . Disability due to injury or illness is something that can happen at any age . Spending 3 % of one 's salary to protect you from a total loss of income in the future is worth it for most people .
If you have a legitimate business with business expense , you should be able to deduct individual disability coverage , but make sure the deduction is worth it . Deducting the disability premium can increase your benefit up to 80 % of your compensation but the benefit is taxable . Not deducting the premium will deliver up to 60 % of your compensation but its tax free . Do the math . A deduction in hand is not necessarily worth two in the bush .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can You Drop A Dependent From My Health Insurance ?
You can easily drop a dependent from your exiting policy by contacting the carrier and requesting they come off . You should however have a back up plan to keep the dependent insured without a gap in coverage . With different family dynamics , it 's common to drop one child off of a plan for various reasons .
Dependent children are eligible to be covered under their parent 's health insurance plan up to age 26 . Regarding dropping a dependent from your health insurance coverage , itwill depend upon whether you have an individual health insurance policy or whether you are covered under a group health insurance policy that includes a Section 125 plan . If you have an individual policy then it should be a simple matter of contacting your agent or the health insurance carrier and notifying them of your intention to drop the dependent child from your coverage . It is most likely that you will need to complete and sign a termination request form so that all the legalities associated with terminating a person 's coverage are complied with . If you are covering your dependent under your group health insurance coverage through your employer and they have a Section 125 plan in place your situation will be more complicated . If you do n't know what a Section 125 plan is , if you are paying any portion of your health insurance premium and it is being taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then you are almost certainly subject to a Section 125 plan . Check with your HR person , the business owner or their insurance broker to get a definitive answer to this issue . Under IRS regulations because you are enjoying the advantages of pre-tax treatment for your share of your health insurance costs this advantage comes with some strings attached regarding the employee 's ability to change their coverage outside of the group 's normal open enrollment period . Essentially you have to have what is called a `` Change of Life Status Event '' to change your coverage status outside of open enrollment time . These are specific events such as marriage , divorce , adoption , losing coverage that you had elsewhere and a few other circumstances . Just getting mad at your 23 year old son who wo n't get off the couch and plays X-Box all day -LRB- while certainly a problem -RRB- does not meet the criteria of a change of life status event and you would not be able to drop them from your coverage until your group 's next open enrollment .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
Yes , but not just because someone in the front office feels like picking on you that day . There would have to be some change in your eligibility status or what the company 's policy is to trigger such an event . For example , you had your working hours reduced below 30 hours per week and this puts you below both your employer 's and the Federal government 's definition of what a full-time eligible employee is -LRB- 30 or more hours per week defines a person as full-time for benefits eligibility under ObamaCare -RRB- . This could trigger your still being an employee but no longer being eligible for their group health insurance plan . If you are responsible for paying a portion of your health insurance premium -LRB- and most employees are these days -RRB- and for some reason you are unable to pay your share of the premium -LRB- usually hard to do since these payments are generally taken out on a payroll deduction basis -RRB- then you could be terminated for non-payment of premium . Of course , if your employer decides to terminate their group health insurance plan entirely and you are dropped from coverage because a group plan no longer exists at your workplace you are obviously dropped . Though usually even small employers will try to give advance notice and employers -LRB- especially larger ones -RRB- are required to give a certain amount of advance notice of a plan change or termination . But you ca n't be dropped from your employer 's coverage in an arbitrary manner while still an employee meeting all the eligibility requirements set forth under your employer 's personnel policies and state and Federal laws . For example , you could n't be terminated from the health insurance plan simply because your were running up a lot of expenses for your cancer treatment .
Unfortunately , the homeowners insurance company has the `` right '' non-renew your coverage each year they renew the policy . It depends on your specific state if they can drop you mid-policy or not . They normally ca n't drop you mid-policy unless they discover a material misrepresentation by you . They can drop you for non-payment , but for a claim they can only non-renew your policy . If you have additional questions please let me know .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
Many people worry that their life insurance policies will drop them if they develop a health condition , as can happen with health insurance . The fact is , if you filled out your life insurance application honestly , complied with whatever they asked you to do , and got a policy , that policy is yours to keep . You can have a heart attack the next month and it will pay the death benefit . You can start smoking the next year and it will pay the death benefit . You can not be dropped over something you did not know ahead of time . Given that type of guarantee , why not lock your life insurance policy in for as long as you can . If you can get coverage for 30 years or a lifetime instead of 10 , have a need for longer coverage , and can afford it , no one can take it away from you as long you keep paying the premiums .
A little more context would have helped here . I will presume you are asking about staying on your husband 's group health insurance . Here you can get a definitive Yes and No . It really is now a matter of the husband 's employer 's personnel policies . As a general rule in 2o14 , employers who are offering group health insurance to their employees also make that coverage available to the employee 's dependents , including spouses . One of the oddities of the Affordable Care Act is that it does not define spouses as being eligible dependents . So , technically , as long as they offer coverage to dependent children , an employer could actually exclude spouses from coverage under the terms of its group health plan and be within the letter of the law . Very few employers have taken things to the extreme of completely dropping spouses from eligibility . You do , however , see a growing move to either require working spouses who have coverage available from their job to enroll in their employer 's coverage or even more commonly , such spouses are assessed a higher premium from their spouse 's health plan if they could be covered elsewhere and waive that coverage . This is an area where employer policies are evolving rapidly so it will be wise to stay up to date on these matters with your husband 's coverage .
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
You can easily drop a dependent from your exiting policy by contacting the carrier and requesting they come off . You should however have a back up plan to keep the dependent insured without a gap in coverage . With different family dynamics , it 's common to drop one child off of a plan for various reasons .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- dependent children are allowed to stay on their parent 's health insurance coverage until age 26 . This is without regard to the whether the dependent child is or is not a full-time student , is married , or has coverage available through their own employer . So , in the vast majority of situations a dependent child can not be kicked off their parents coverage until they turn 26 . I say the vast majority of cases because in typical fashion there are these odd quirks in the law that no one read before they passed it . One of those odd quirks applies to what are called `` grandfathered '' health plans -LRB- policies that were in effect prior to the March 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act . Buried in the fine print is a provision that became applicable on January 1 , 2014 . Under this provision , if the adult dependent child does have health insurance available to them through their employer then they can be dropped from their parent 's coverage . As such , whether your parent 's individual or group health insurance plan qualifies as a `` grandfathered '' policy can be a crucial factor in determining the adult dependent 's eligibility for continued coverage .
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Plan AB Pay For Total Knee Replacement In 2014 ?
Most likely yes , but a lot of it depends on medical necessity , services needed in combination with the surgery itself , post-op care , and other factors . The cost of the care will also depend on whether it 's an inpatient or outpatient procedure , the percentage of cost Medicare will cover , etc. . I would make sure to have a Medigap plan in place to cover the costs that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. if Medicare covers 80 % of the expenses , the plan would cover the other 20 % if it 's a plan F or G - that 20 % can be a very high dollar figure if you paid it yourself -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap plan and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is very comprehensive health coverage for those that qualify . Medicare will cover a Total Knee Replacement as long as the Physician , Hospital , and any other healthcare providers are deemed as providers . You can check each provider out on the Medicare.gov website . Medicare Part A would cover the hospital expenses and if a Skilled Nursing Facility is needed for rehabilitation . You will have a deductible if you only have Medicare A and B . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of the out of pocket costs . Medicare Part B would cover the Physician charges and any outpatient services required . You have an annual deductible and 20 % coinsurance . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of these our to pocket cost . Medicare Advantage plans have daily charges and copays that vary for every plan . You should check with the plan to confirm that the providers are in their network and determine what your costs might be .
Qualified annuities generally refer to tax deferred annuities is a qualified plan like ab ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -LRB- qualified plan such as a 410 -LRB- k -RRB- . By inserting tax deferred annuities into a qualified plan contribution re-characterizes the basis as taxable during distributions , i.e. the entire annuity distributions are taxable as ordinary income .
Knee replacement surgery is normally a Medicare covered expense assuming the surgery is considered medically necessary and you are a good candidate for joint replacement . The cost of knee replacement is usually around $ 45,000 but the Medicare allowance is in the $ 11,000 range . If you have a good Medigap plan your share will be significantly less .
Life Insurance is non taxable , anddeath benefit is paid lump sum . This is beneficial in order to repair the family financial losses by creating an estate , paying for funeral expenses , mortgages , and passing wealth for the family generations to come . That is how Life insurance is designed to work . Always name a beneficiary to your policy . Never anyone under a legal age for then the money will be tied up in probate until they are of legal age . Consult with ab Life agent like myself and get more information on how Life Insurance works . I am sure this will benefit you , your family and estate .
The cost of complete knee replacement is about $ 45,000 . The Medicare allowance is in the $ 11,000 range . A partial knee replacement is about half that amount . As Rick indicated , a good Medigap plan could reduce your out of pocket cost to $ 0 if you had Medicare supplement plan F . A little more with a different plan .
Yes . Of course an appropriate diagnosis and recommendation for treatment will have to be made and you will want to exhaust any other less intrusive forms of treatment before you or your health insurance carrier should want to be replacing your original parts . But knee replacements , when medically necessary , are routinely covered services subject to whatever deductible , coinsurance and/or copayments are in your health insurance policy . The state of the art in replacement surgeries for knees and hips have advanced rapidlyand are far less traumatic than they were just a few years ago . I have a friend who recently had hip socket replacement surgery done on an outpatient basis who went in for the procedure early in the morning and walked out using a cane by mid-afternoon .
All great answers above ... . Yup ... the `` what , when , where , etc. '' is the key . ALSO ... how much coverage are you trying to buy ?? There are many `` guarantee issue '' plans out there -LRB- depending on age -RRB- . Some are instant coverage while others have a `` ramp up '' period before you get full coverage . `` Might be '' an option ... yet we don ; t know enough ab out you -LRB- age , sex , other history -RRB- . I once placed 5 policies in force for one dude ... he needed a specific amount for his divorce . The judge did n't care about the cost because of the underwriting mess he created . So ... 5 policies . He 's now down to 2 policies 3 years later . When I played high school basket ball , Air Jordan 's first arrived . EVERY KID wanted them . Yet , even way back then , they were SOOOO expensive -LRB- like your life rate will be right now -RRB- . Did I say , `` Screw you Jordan '' & go and play barefoot ? NO ... I bought `` what i could '' -LRB- OK . Dad bought what he could -RRB- & I played . I was still a starter . I still won a trophy at the tournament . Just like with your car insurance , the more time that passes , the less you 're penalized for the DUI . Each year you can assess your situation for a `` better value '' . Suggestion ... Do what you can right NOW & let time fix the rate issue .
Medicare does cover joint replacement if the need to replace the joint is considered medically necessary . Joint replacement includes shoulder , hip , knee and other body joints . Make sure you use a medical provider that accepts assignment . Some replacement joint devices are considered a `` premium '' device . You may be responsible for paying the difference in a basic device and an upgrade . Your provider can advise .
Medicare will pay for hip replacements , if medically necessary . Ca n't say which is # 1 and which is # 2 , but hip and knee replacements and cataracts are the the first things people get when they become eligible for Medicare . If you are anticipating a hip replacement , sign on for for original Medicare and a Medicare supplement . If you go the Advantage route you will pay $ 2000 - $ 3000 OOP .
Unfortunately , knee walkers are not normally paid for by Medicare . If you can get a doctor 's prescription saying that crutches or canes will not provide the support needed , it may be possible for Medicare Part B to cover a knee walker . However , providers of knee walkers generally state that Medicare does not cover this type of walker at this point in time , and under most circumstances .
Yes , Medicare will pay for knee replacement surgeries . Medicare also pays for hip replacements . This type of surgery is one of the larger expenditures by Medicare and provided pain relief and increased mobility to hundreds of thousands of seniors -LRB- and younger persons -RRB- over the years since knee replacement were invented .
Yes Medicare does pay for Medically necessary knee replacement . If all you have is original Medicare you will be responsible for your Part A Hospital deductible and possibly some Part B Medical expenses . If you must do rehab in a nursing facility , the first 20 days will be paid at 100 % . Some rehab done at home may also be paid for .
Medicare will pay for Euflexxa injections for the knee only . As with all treatments , it must be determined to be medically necessary to be covered by Medicare . Evidence of osteoarthritis of the knee is required by X-ray in order for Medicare to cover hyaluronan injections , of which Euflexxa is one .
Yes , Medicare will pay for Synvisc-One injections if for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee . The osteoarthritis must be verified by X-Ray and of course , the one giving the injection must be Medicare approved . It can only be given once every 6 months and only osteoarthritis of the knee is approved by Medicare for Synvisc , which is a hyalauronan drug .
Medicare will cover Euflexxa and otherHyaluronan injections for osteoarthritis of the knee , only . The injectable drugs covered are Euflexxa , Hyalgan , Synvisc , Supartz , Orthovisc , and Synvisc One . The osteoarthritis of the knee must be proven by x-ray and no more than one injection will be paid for in every 6 months .
If you do have a pre-existing condition , it 's possible that that particular condition would be excluded . For example , if you have had several knee surgeries , it 's most likely that they 'd exclude your knee . Do n't forget that if you get denied for DI due to a pre-exisiting condition , you could still possibly receive critical illness insurance .
I am correcting my original answer due to a message I received from a helpful reader : Florida BC/BS and Oklahoma Health Care Authority have listed this drug as well as the other hyaluronic acid injections as non-covered based on the May 2013 AAOS release of Treatment of Osteoarthritic of the Knee : Evidence Based Guidance which included information that this treatment for OA of the knee is no longer recommended .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
I believe Medicare can help pay for a lift chair , if there 's a medical necessity -LRB- for those with severe hip or knee arthritis , or a neuromuscular disease , and can not get up from a seated position to stand on their own -RRB- , as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- under your Medicare Part B insurance . Part B would pay 80 % of the cost and you would be responsible for the remaining 20 % . I 'd recommend calling Medicare to get more specific input .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Air Conditioners ?
An air conditioner would not be covered under a regular renters insurance policy under normal circumstances . If the air conditioner was damaged due to a covered loss then the damage may be covered less your deductible . Read your policy completely to know what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
The air conditioner is a part of a residence . Damage to the air condition from one of the perils stated in the policy will be repaired by the insurance company . This does not apply to the air conditioner requiring repair from normal usage . There are policies available to cover home appliances .
An air conditioner would not be covered under a regular renters insurance policy under normal circumstances . If the air conditioner was damaged due to a covered loss then the damage may be covered less your deductible . Read your policy completely to know what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
If the air conditioner is damaged by a covered peril then it may be covered under your homeowners insurance . If it simply breaks down then it is not . For example , lightning strikes your air conditioner , a tree falls on it , a fire destroys it , there is coverage . Your child decides to put a stick in the running fan and damages it or it simply stops working due to age or normal wear and tear , there is no coverage .
It depends on why the air conditioner is leaking , but probably not . Home insurance is n't designed to cover normal wear and tear and breakdown of equipment , which is likely the cause of a leak from an air conditioner . Water damage typically has to be caused by sudden and accidental pipe bursting to be covered under your homeowners policy , but coverage varies by company , so check with your agent or broker .
Based on the question I have to make assumptions that your old air conditioner just wore out and broke down . If this is the case then no , your homeowners insurance will not cover to get you a new air conditioner . Homeowners insurance polices are not warranties or maintenance policies . This includes mechanical breakdown . Damage must be sudden and accidental . Fire , or vandalism would fall into the sudden and accidental category .
A leaking air conditioner may only be covered by homeowners insurance in the following 2 circumstances : 1 . If the air conditioning unit 's leak was caused by a covered peril -LRB- i.e. fire , vandalism , wind etc. . . -RRB- 2 . If the homeowners insurance policy has an Equipment Breakdown -LRB- home warranty -RRB- Endorsement affording coverage for the air conditioning system . Most carriers do not offer the equipment breakdown endorsement on a homeowners policy but it is worth asking your local agent or broker if one is available .
Homeowners policies cover damages sustained to the residence and personal property from named perils . Mechanical breakdown is not a named peril in very many , if any homeowners insurance policies . If the property is burned and the air conditioner is damaged , then it would be covered .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , air purifiers are not covered by Medicare . They are listed as follows : Air Cleaners - Deny - environmental and control equipment ; not primarily medical in nature -LRB- 1861 -LRB- n -RRB- of the Act -RRB- However , some air purifier websites state that it may be possible to get reimbursement for their air purifiers by Medicare if you submit the doctor 's order prescribing it . You can try it , but I would not count on it when making your purchase .
Typically , air purifiers and related items such as humidifiers and electric air cleaners are not covered by Medicare . However , Medicare may be able to cover a humidifier , when medically necessary , if used with some forms of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . Under that scenario , I would suggest confirming with Medicare directly to see what would be necessary to meet those requirements . I do n't know how much they cost brand new , but if expense tolerance is a large concern and one is desired , there may be discount ones or pre-owned ones that may be available for a low price that is tolerable on websites such as amazon , ebay , etc. . I would suggest taking a look in those areas for an alternative way to save money on the purchase of an air purifier . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most true major medical insurance plans cover emergency medical transport which would include both ground and air -LRB- helicopter -RRB- transport . Use of an air ambulance is usually a call made by onsite medical personnel , not at the request of the patient . One thing to keep in mind is this . Air transport is quite expensive -LRB- $ 7000 + -RRB- and often the transport company will be non-par -LRB- not in any network -RRB- .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Not all ! Accidental discharge of water and its attendant damages is normally covered . This means when there is an accidental discharge of liquids or steam from the plumbing , heating or air-conditionaing the loss is a covered loss . It is very important to understand what is not covered . Flood is one of the most common causes of loss in the US and the homeowner 's policy does not cover it . Water back up such as from a blocked sewer line is not a covered loss -LRB- some companies offer the coverage as an option . -RRB- When there is repeated or continuous seepage or leakage from a system in the house that is not covered .
What is it ??? A RIP OFF ... usually . If you trigger a benefit , the payout goes to the `` lender '' ... NOT your family . Do n't get in the position to where you have to ask if it 's good or not ... BUY disability & life insurance NOW ... You will die one day . . Yet along the way you are most likely to suffer a disability or critical illness that puts you out of work for months , or years , before you pass away form the situation . If you pass away at all form it . If you have a tight budget , there are plans available in many states that are a Life/Disability/Critical Illness `` All in one Policy '' . It is most often better to have standalone plans -LRB- better benefits for disability & critical -RRB- , yet the all helps cover all your bases to SOME LEVEL ... I remember when I played High School basket ball & the very first Air Jordan 's came out . EVERY KID wanted them . Yet my family could n't afford them . Did I give up , quit the team , all because I did n't have `` Air Jordan 's '' ... NO . My parents bought `` something '' ... & I STILLWAS A STARTING FORWARD my senior year . Point is ... when you need insurance , get something even if what you WANT is n't within reach . Only buy Credit `` whatever '' if you have no other means of securing standalone individual life/disability/critical insurance . - gravy
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
A condominium is a collection of individual home units and common areas along with the land where the building is built . Individual home ownership within a condominium means ownership of only the air space confining the boundaries of the home . The exterior walls , common areas and other property are owned by the condominium association . The result is that a condo policy does not cover anything except the inside of the condominium unit .
Air Conditioning Units are covered under Homeowners Insurance policies for the perils afforded against by the policy ; i.e. Fire , Wind , Hail , Vandalism etc. . . If the question is regarding repairs and maintenance , the unit would be covered either by a Manufacturer 's Service Contract or a Home Warranty Policy and not your Home Insurance Policy . Homeowners Insurance is designed to protect the home against covered perils to assist the homeowner from financial loss ; it is not designed as a repairs and warranty policy for appliances and general upkeep . Home Warranty policies are available for appliances and repairs of systems in homes ; the homeowner would have to pay a premium for the warranty policy and each service visit would be covered after a deductible which would be agreed upon on the policy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Is Health Insurance For A Married Couple ?
Individual health insurance , per the requirements of the Affordable Care Act after January 1 , 2014 , is sold on a community rated basis . This is a much different method than has been used by the majority of states and so while it would have been difficult to answer your question in the past it 's virtually impossible now . You are simply going to have to get some quotes . Factors such as your state of residence -LRB- and where you reside within a state -RRB- , your and any covered dependents dates of birth , the number of covered dependents under 21 and the number over age 21 , the tobacco use status of you and/or any covered dependents , are all factors applied when calculating an individual health insurance rate . Obviously , these factors are unique for each person 's situation , that 's why no one can just say `` it will be $ 500 per month '' . You can do some online searches , you can go to the websites of health insurance carriers , you can even go to Healthcare.gov to get some ideas of what different plans , from different carriers , with different provider networks , and vastly differing rules will cost you and cover . And you may figure out correctly if you would qualify for any subsidy in the government marketplaces . Or , you can look health up a qualified health insurance broker , tell them your information and what you are looking for in general terms and they will do all the work for you , explain the subtle and not-so-subtle differences between different individual health insurance carriers , and help you make an informed decision . All for the same price as doing it yourself . For help please feel free to visit my web site .
The cost for health insurance for married couples depends on a few factors . 1 . Age at time of appliction 2 . The area where you live 3 . How many dependents you have 4 . If your eligible for a tax credit to be applied to premiums Should you want toget more information and quotes , you can view my profile and link to my company 's website for carriers we represent in your area .
Well , itapparently depends upon what sex your significant other is . If you are a man and woman living together in a committed relationship but not married , unless your employer 's policy allows for coverage in such situations then theanswer is generally `` No '' and it appears it will be that way going forward . If , however , you are a same sex couple in a committed relationship then in some states this is already accepted . And , a March 14 , 2014 announcement from Health and Human Services will essentially require all health plans that offer coverage for married heterosexual couples to do so for same sex couples married in a jurisdiction that recognizes same sex marriages . This requirement goes into effect on January 1 , 2015 but the Obama administration is encouraging employers to voluntarily comply with this rule before then . Larger , self-insured employers had already been operating under similar rules issued by the Department of Labor last fall . Of course , not every state recognizes same sex marriages . So , you still need to do some homework on your particular situation in your state of residence and the individual or group health insurance contracts issued there . I can see where the need for a domestic partnership agreement will be a good idea in some states but clearly the requirements for health insurance plans regulated under the Affordable Care Act have moved to recognize same sex marriage as being on a par with heterosexual marriage . But a couple just living together with no formal legal commitments , regardless of sexual orientation , would appear to be much more problematic and that kind of `` significant other '' would probably not meet the requirements of being a legitimate dependent under the law .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Life insurance can affect SSI if it exceeds the resource limit . What IS allowed in life insurance : Policy or policies with combined face amount of $ 1,500 -LRB- if married , $ 1,500 for each spouse -RRB- $ 1,500 prepaid burial fund -LRB- if married , one for each spouse -RRB- If the person or couple with the burial fund also has life insurance , some of the burial fund may count toward the $ 2,000 limit for an individual or $ 3,000 limit for a married couple .
Great question ! Many insurance companies offer multiple car discounts and I have seen substantial savings for couples who combine their auto policies . A good agent will be able to place you with the right company that will provide the best discount for your combined policy . That said , there is no reason a couple needs to wait to get married to get an auto policy together . I have written policies for stable couples who have an established relationship without yet being married . Please let me know if I can be of any assistance ! Carl Houde
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance should a married couple have ? '' Well , generally , married couples now are dual income . Everybody 's working , it seems like , today . Their mortgage 's usually predicated on two incomes , their debt is predicated on two incomes , all the ability for them to pay for college education and future retirement is generally predicated on those two incomes . So you want to protect both of them and you want to be able to cover all those arenas , including by the way , income if one spouse dies . I want the death benefit to pay off all those obligations and all those indebtedness but I also want it to pay and generate an income so that my spouse can stay in the house , can go ahead and pay off those bills , and meet all our future obligations , especially if we have children involved . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Absolutely . But there are different rules if the joint owners are a married couple or not -LRB- for example , a Father names his daughter as joint owner -RRB- . If the joint owners of the annuity are married , then it is recommended that each spouse names the other as primary beneficiary . For the spousal exception to the required distribution rules to apply , the surviving spouse must be the designated beneficiary of the contract . These rules are designed to prevent the use of joint ownership to obtain tax deferral on annuity earnings over more than one lifetime , except in the case of married couples . In the event of the owners death , the spouse can succeed to ownership by application of the spousal exception to the required distribution rule . If someone other than the surviving spouse is the designated beneficiary , or even if the spouse is the beneficiary along with another person , then even if the surviving spouse is a joint owner , the spousal exception is lost . There are some caveats to setting up a jointly owned annuity . It 's best to talk to a professional insurance agent to avoid the pitfalls .
Still ? The price of long term care is based on age , gender and health . Married couples can receive a discount by bundling their coverage together . The earlier in life you purchase long term care the lower the premium . Keep in mind that current retirement modeling suggests that a senior married couple will pay $ 250,000 in medical care during their lifetime . Is that worth it ?
The death of a spouse is perhaps the most emotionally traumatic event which humans experience . What would you do if your spouse died unexpectedly ? In over 55 % of married-couple families today , both marriage partners work outside the home at least part time . -LRB- 1 -RRB- Often the financial requirements to run the household substantially exceed the income of either spouse alone . If an untimely death were to occur , the inability to meet financial obligations with the single remaining spouses income might require the hasty sale of assets or , even worse , a bank foreclosure on the family residence . Life insurance is an excellent means of providing money when it is needed in these traumatic moments . Some families are fortunate enough to allow either the mother or father to stay home with small children while the other earns sufficient cash to meet household and living expenses . It is obvious that the loss of a breadwinner would create a financial calamity . Couples should consider the potential cost of replacing the services of the spouse who stays at home to care for the children . Without the deceased spouse , a surviving spouse working outside the home would face new expenditures for child care , either in the home or at a babysitter or day care center as well as someone to take the children to the doctor , dentist , piano lessons , etc. . Perhaps the surviving parent could take time off work to fulfill these obligations , but this time off work would also amount to a financial loss . Most families can help effectively remove this potential financial emergency by acquiring a life insurance policy on each spouse . Source : Statistical Abstract of the United States : 2012 , Table 700 Married-Couple Families ; data from 2009 . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
When you consider that the average married couple will spend around $ 250,000 during their retirement years is it worth it to protect against that probable event ? A married coupled age 60 with standard health will pay around $ 300 a month for long term care . Is that worth it ? Some consumers object to long term care because they may never use it , so they lose it . There are alternatives with life and annuity products that offer living benefits , in this case long term care , that may have cash value results if the living benefits are used .
The marital deduction act was the basis for creating joint life insurance or survivorship insurance . The marital deduction act allowed married couples to pass assets between them at the death of the first spouse . Survivorship was created to pay the federal estate tax at the second death of a married couple , coinciding with the marital deduction act . Survivorship policies have several actuarial formats like participating whole life , variable universal life , indexed universal life , current assumptions universal life .
Does the value proposition make sense for long term care insurance which protects extended care risk of assisted living and nursing home care . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 during retirement on medical expenses and extended care . The odds are that you 'll live longer than the preceding generation . If that 's true you need extended care even longer . A non smoking married couple both age 60 will pay around $ 300 a month for $ 7,000 a month benefit totally $ 420,000 . Does that make sense ?
You should purchase long term care for your retirement years . The statistics are significant that youll experience a need for assisted living or perhaps nursing home confinement . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 on medical and extended care during their retirement years . Securing long term care is important , especially when youre healthy and heading into your late fifties , early sixties . Most married couples who purchase long term care in their early 60s are opting to purchase the maximum benefit with at least a 3 % inflation rider . The total benefits generally run $ 7,000 a calendar month with max benefits of around $ 400,000 to $ 420,000 for two 60 year old non-smokers on a joint policy .
It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . Generally speaking , two single individuals insuring their own cars may pay more than two married individuals insuring their two cars together . There are a couple of factors that may cause this . First , the rate structure that a company has for sigle folks as opposed to married folks . The second is a multi car discount aht can further drive down the cost for the married folks . Always be sure to ask about any available discounts when making your decisions on your car insurance .
In California there isnt a discount available for married people . Single drivers pay the same as married drivers based upon their years of experience and driving record . Life Insurance policies are available to joint lives regardless of the marital status . Homeowners policies , likewise , do not lower the cost for married couples as opposed to other arrangements . Marriage may be an asset in many regards ; however , it does not enjoy lower costs in the insurance world .
Obviously not sure how every carrier handles this in our State but one of the largest National Carriers in Florida does have a feature that addresses this situation . When a couple lives together in a marital type relationship , they can get the advantage of a married rate . It is not really a discount by definition but can result in paying less premium through the rating process . Also , with regard to the National Carrier Florida auto policy referenced here , the couple does not have to change the vehicle titles names . You need to consult with a local independent insurance agency . They will be able to tell you how this is handled by each carrier they represent .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
There are three basic planning goals for life insurance : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification At minimum , seniors have final expense liabilities that they generally dont desire to pass on to their children . Covering those expenses with a final expense life insurance product is a great alternative with a company that offers benevolent geriatric underwriting . Life insurance underwriting is extremely important as you become older , especially if you need more coverage than final expense . A good life insurance company that has sizable retention and death benefit break points can really help keep the price tag down . Retention is the risk the life insurance company is willing to take on without sharing the risk with other life insurance companies . The bigger the retention , the more wiggle room to negotiate the underwriting offer . And death benefit break points can reduce the cost of insurance as you buy more coverage . Break points generally start at $ 250,000 , then $ 500,000 , $ 1,000,000 and $ 3,000,000 . Guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice . Income Life insurance has the potential to generate tax advantaged income and , if properly designed , may generate tax free income as long as the policy is issued as a non-modified endowment contract and is kept in force for the life of the insured . Some seniors use life insurance tax free income in tandem with their Social Security benefits and defer their qualified plan distributions until age 70 . Its a good planning strategy . Life insurance policies with the least expense loads are the most desirable . Indexed universal life may be the best policy choice . Inheritance Many seniors desire to make a difference with their children , grandchildren and charities . A survivorship policy for married couples is the best solution because in leverages two lives on one contract and pays the death claim at the death of the second insured . Survivorship guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for married couples and guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for single seniors . We spreadsheet the life insurance companies based on underwriting , product provisions and price , assisting seniors in the decision making process .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When To Drop Universal Life Insurance ?
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
This can actually be a bit of a loaded question because the type of coverage you 're looking for , your need , your risk class , premium tolerance , and a number of other factors will really direct where you should go to buy your insurance . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage -LRB- a combination of benefits -RRB- - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . You can also create a combination of benefits by having some a larger sum total of term insurance for the first part and have it drop to a lower amount for the back end of a given length of time -LRB- e.g. you have $ 1,000,000 for the first 20 years and then have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 -RRB- . A brief description of the two types of coverage are as follows : Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . It 's always advisable to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Because , under the right circumstances and with the right carrier , you can outperform whole life 's growth by buying universal life . Universal is tied to certain market activity , which can permit additional growth over the carriers general fund . However , in down markets , it permits loss , which can actually cause an increase in the premium . There is , however , an easy way to prevent any such loss . Buy Indexed universal life . It provides a slight decrease in the market 's appreciation in exchange for a guarantee that you will never lose money when the market drops . Your funds are locked in annually . Talk with your agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
Many life insurance policies expire . If you have a policy that you must drop then the proper time to do that is when you no longer love anyone . Or when you no longer owe anyone money . Or when you no longer want to make a difference in this world . You certainly do not want to drop a policy if your health is declining , or when there are still loose ends in your estate .
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
What do you want it for and what to protect ? Is it for a temporary need , like until the mortgage is paid off , or the kids through school ? Or for your spouse at your death ? Term insurance can be bought for twenty or even thirty years , it is fairly low cost , but when its gone its gone . Permanent life will last to your death , and the premiums will not go up , it accumulates cash value , and can be borrowed against . If you stop paying for your term , it will be gone in 30 days , but with permanent , if you miss a payment , it can be paid from your accumulated value . Permanent can be either whole life or universal life . Universal can be tied to some stock index , and go up a bit more than whole , but may also drop to a certain point . How much risk do you want ? Your decision . Of course with indexed universal , there are some protections at the bottom end , which cost you some of the top end performance . Thank you . GARY LANE .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will Health Insurance Pay For Wisdom Teeth Removal ?
That is a great question ! Hopefully you have a dental policy ? That 's what normally would cover this . But your health insurance may cover some of it , depending upon the reason for needing them removed . Normal decay probably is n't going to be covered if you do n't have dental , I 'm afraid . Contact your HR person , or plan administrator and ask to be certain . Thanks for asking !
The answer to this question would depend on the reason for the removal . Most claims for extractions are sent to your dental insurance first , not your health insurance . If the wisdom teeth are what 's called ` boney impactions ' , the claim will be sent to your health insurance company to coordination benefit with your dental plan , since that treatment is covered under health insurance .
The answer to this question can depend on the nature of your wisdom teeth removal . Most claims for extractions are sent to your dental insurance first , not your health insurance . If the wisdom teeth are what 's called ` boney impactions ' , the claim will be sent to your health insurance company to coordination benefit with your dental plan , since that treatment is covered under health insurance .
That will depend on the nature of your wisdom teeth removal . Most claims for extractions are sent to your dental insurance first . If the wisdom teeth are what 's called ` boney impactions ' , then the claim will be sent to your health insurance company to coordination benefit with your dental plan , as ` boney impactions ' are covered under health insurance .
The answer to this question would depend on the reason for the removal . Most claims for extractions are sent to your dental insurance first , not your health insurance . If the wisdom teeth are what 's called ` boney impactions ' , the claim will be sent to your health insurance company to coordination benefit with your dental plan , since that treatment is covered under health insurance .
Medicare does not cover the majority of dental treatment such as cleanings , X-Rays , wisdom teeth removal , extractions etc. . . However , if treatment is medically necessary -LRB- such as hospitalization -RRB- , it is treated differently . However , there some Medicare Advantage plans that will provide benefits . Vision benefits may also be included . Discussing your options with an experienced broker or visiting a reputable national website will often help you understand which plans are best for your specific situation . You can also purchase a separate dental policy since many of the large health insurers offer coverage . There are also dental `` discount '' plans that are rather limited in coverage but relatively inexpensive .
Wisdom teeth extraction is typically not covered under health insurance policies , unless caused by another covered event . However , dental insurance plans are the most likely coverage to pay for those types of expenses . There may be waiting periods and limitations , but there is no doubt that a dental policy is your best choice .
Not usually . Wisdom teeth extraction would be covered under a dental insurance plan . There are exceptions , but usually medical would come into play only in an emergency situation . It will depend on your medical and dental plans . It is always a good idea to read your exclusions pages of any insurance policy you have . Learning what is not covered , can actually save you money .
That is a great question ! The exchanges offered in the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- are essentially marketplaces where you can compare several companies , and the plans that they offer . One of the best things about the exchanges are that the Federal one , www.healthcare.gov and the States that offered them allow for the folks who purchase from them to have the opportunity to have the prices rebated if they fall under certain income levels . Cheap , affordable coverage is a great thing . But look fast , as our new Congress is already talking about removing the benefits of the act , and the Supreme Court in it 's wisdom will probably help . This may well be the last year that many Americans can afford coverage for a while . Thanks for asking !
The short answer is generally no , that 's what Dental insurance is for . However , there are several caveats to this . First , the Affordable Care act does require pediatric dental coverage as part of the offer the health insurance plans have to make , so there is now some dental coverage for your children available in health insurance . Check with your current carrier to get the details . Secondly , there is a difference between , check up , filling a cavity , teeth clean etc. and an actual medical condition . For example , if your jaw was broken in a fall and it damaged some of your teeth in the process . Your health carrier may cover some or all of it because it is injury related and part of a larger issue . or is you have a cancer that destroys part of your jaw and teeth , again this is a medical issue and not just a dental one and your carrier may cover some of the medical expenses .
Yes , I know , teeth are part of your body and so it is easy for some people to think that they are covered under health insurance . However , this is rarely the case , especially when it comes to orthodontics -LRB- which means braces for the teeth in most cases -RRB- . There are some narrow circumstances when medical necessity criteria for some oral surgeries or treatments would be covered by your major medical coverage -LRB- the patient is a Hemophiliac for example -RRB- but braces are unlikely to ever fall into even this rare category . In practical terms , if you want insurance coverage for orthodontia you will need to purchase a dental insurance policy that covers orthodontia . You should be aware that even dental insurance policies generally have a lifetime maximum benefit for orthodontia that places a limit on the amount the policy will pay for braces . A lifetime maximum benefit of $ 1000 is very common though there are policies with higher limits -LRB- e.g. - $ 2000 -RRB- . So , even when you have orthodontia coverage you can anticipate some fairly meaningful out-of-pocket expenses .
Most student health plans provide limited benefits and are overpriced . For about the same premium you can usually get a true major medical plan . Student health plans usually include benefits centered around the student health center and possibly an affiliation with a local hospital . Pre-existing conditions may not be covered at all or there will be a delay of up to 12 months before they are considered a covered expense . Also the health policies have an expiration date , usually coinciding with the school year . Dental benefits , if included , are most likely limited to treating injury to your teeth .
Original Medicare does not pay for dental work that is part of routine care of the teeth , such as exam , cleanings , fluoride treatments , or fillings . It also will not pay for dentures . Some Medicare Supplement plans will cover some dental work . Medicare will cover oral work that done to protect or treat the patient 's general health , or to prepare the patient for surgery , radiation , etc that will be performed for a health condition . It will also cover jaw surgery for a broken jaw , or follow up to an infection after an extraction . If the dental patient has a life threatening condition , Medicare may pay for the cost of hospitalization but not the dental work itself .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
Generally , Medicare will not pay for teeth implants , just as Medicare does not cover fillings , crowns or dentures . Since Medicare will do reconstructive surgery on the jaw , it is possible that a tooth implant might be approved if it is proved to be a necessary part of that particular surgery .
Statistics show that 70 percent of people who reach age 65 will have a need for long term care . By having long term care insurance , you can ensure that your family wo n't have to pull from their savings to help pay for you care should you need become unable to perform one of the activities of daily living -LRB- brushing your teeth , bathing , feeding yourself , etc. -RRB- and need to receive care -LRB- nursing home , in-home care , hospice , etc. -RRB- .
Conventional wisdom is no later than age 50 when the potential morbidity events begin to increase and at age 62 for price considerations . Establishing a long term care insurance policy is part of defensive retirement planning and should be a high priority based on life expectancy and the average cost fo extended care during your senior years .
There are schools of thought that purchasing long term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- early on when youre healthy is the ideal time to buy LTCi . Conventional wisdom is no later than age 50 when the potential morbidity events begin to increase and at age 62 for price considerations . Establishing a long term care insurance policy is part of defensive retirement planning and should be a high priority based on life expectancy and the average cost for extended care during your senior years .
That is a great question ! The best answer is right away ! The sooner the better , honestly . Current wisdom says to live at your current lifestyle in retirement , you will need to save between 8-10x your current salary . If you 'd like to live better than you are now , you will need to save more . I can not stress enough how much better off you are if you start your retirement planning when you are young . If you need to start playing catch up , and would like some help , please drop me a line , I 'm happy to help , okay ? Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Absolutely you can . In fact , there are probably more policies available for people aged 50-75 than there are any others . Younger people do n't believe that their ends will ever come , while age brings wisdom , in many cases . There are a ton of great options , and a good agent can help you find an affordable policy with the coverage that you can safely afford . If you 'd like some more details , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thank you for asking !
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Can Diabetics Get Long Term Care Insurance ?
Diabetics can get Long Term Care Insurance under some conditions . They key for people with diabetes to getting Long Term Care Insurance , Disability Insurance , or Life Insurance is diabetic CONTROL . If you have a history of A1C under 8 and no side effects from your diabetes , getting a traditional long term care policy is possible . However , some LTC policies do exclude the use of insulin , regardless of control .
Diabetics can get Long Term Care Insurance under some conditions . They key for people with diabetes to getting Long Term Care Insurance , Disability Insurance , or Life Insurance is diabetic CONTROL . If you have a history of A1C under 8 and no side effects from your diabetes , getting a traditional long term care policy is possible . However , some LTC policies do exclude the use of insulin , regardless of control .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
Most people with diabetes can get life insurance . Children with type 1 diabetes are the notable exception ; it is very difficult to find a policy for them until they are at least age 18 . All the more reason to add your children to a child rider or get them a policy of their own while they are very young , especially if diabetes runs in the family . The types of policies that you can get while having diabetes , are as varied as the persons with type 1 , 1.5 , 2 , or gestational diabetes . Underwriters will look at your history of control , with A1C being the dominant indicator , but also at whether you have current complications such as neuropathy , heart disease , or kidney disease . They will look at your age of diagnosis , the length of time you have had diabetes , and the types of treatments you have had . Based on all this data , the insurance company will determine how to rate you . People with diabetes can be rated Preferred all the way to a high table rating . If your blood glucose is too high or you have too many complications to get a medically underwritten policy , there are simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies available for most people . Contact an impaired risk life insurance specialist with experience in life insurance for people with diabetes , to be sure that you get placed with a company that will approve you at the best possible rate .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Most people with diabetes can get life insurance , and if you have had a history of good control -LRB- low A1C 's , no protein in urine , no neuropathy -RRB- you can get any type of medically underwritten policy at reasonable rates . Even if you have had some recent periods of poor control or have some side effects of diabetes , there are policies available . This is true even with the combination of diabetes and heart disease , which used to be pretty much uninsurable . There are a few groups who can have a difficult time finding coverage . Children with type 1 diabetes will most likely need to wait until they are adults to qualify for a policy . Persons under age 50 who have very serious side effects -LRB- amputation , kidney dialysis , blindness -RRB- may need to wait until they are older until they can get a guaranteed issue policy . To get your most affordable diabetes life insurance rate , contact an agency that specializes in that and share your health details . There is something out there for nearly every person with diabetes , and by shopping with a broker who carries many options , you can lock in your lowest price based on your particular health details .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have diabetes ? Well , I want to ask some questions first . Has there been any weight change , ten pounds or more , all within the last year ? What is the reason for that change ? When were you diagnosed with diabetes ? Are you controlling your diabetes through diet and exercise ? Are you using all medications ? Are you using insulin ? Has the insured or the person that 's looking for this , had any chest pains or coronary artery disease ? Remember sometimes diabetes with weight and these other ancillary diseases , can complicate it . We call that '' `` multiple impairments . '' '' So , if I can start to answer some of these basic questions , is it diabetes 1 ? Is it diabetes 2 ? Is it controlled by diet and exercise ? Is it controlled by insulin ? Was it adult onset ? I can get a good idea just with this questionnaire , to what kind of offer we can give from life insurance companies that are benevolent towards diabetics .
In addition to the two excellent reasons Neil gave , I would add that a young person might want to buy Long Term Care insurance if you have a family history of rheumatoid arthritis , multiple sclerosis , diabetes , or other health conditions that increase the chances of needing long term care in the future . It is nearly impossible to get long term care insurance after being diagnosed with some diseases . Getting the coverage while you can is a good idea with any type of insurance that relies on medical underwriting , as Long Term Care insurance does .
Using a life insurance agency that specializes in `` impaired risk '' life insurance is a good way to make sure that you are getting the best possible diabetic life insurance rate . One 's method of diabetic treatment , history of A1C 's , age at diagnosis , whether there are complications from diabetes , weight , tobacco use , and having additional health conditions all have a huge bearing on what medically underwritten policy the person with diabetes can qualify for , and how much he/she will pay . Having specialized in diabetic life insurance for over 10 years , I have found that there are no simple rules or tricks for getting someone the best price . You really have to know what you are doing . If just looking for a small policy with no exam , there are also lots of choices , and again , diabetic control can make a big difference in what you policy you qualify for and what price you will pay . It is very difficult to sift through all that without the assistance of an experienced , impaired risk life insurance agent who is able to shop a number of carriers to find you the most affordable diabetes life insurance rate .
Yes , some people with diabetes can now get life insurance . When I started 25 years ago , diabetes was an automatic decline . As time has gone by , insurance companies have discovered the wide range of people within the class of diabetics . Some are very healthy and have good control of their blood sugars . Others may lack any control over their blood sugars . Most agents ask to pre underwrite diabetics to get underwriters to review on a individual basis , so no blanket declines anymore . If you 're a diabetic with good control , chances are you can find a fairly priced product from several carriers . If your control is OK , you 'll find something as well . Price may be more than you thought but you can get coverage instead of a `` no '' .
People with diabetes can get life insurance , and if they have a history of good diabetic control , they can get any type of policy that they want . If A1C 's run over 9 or there is significant neuropathy or kidney damage , there are simplified policies available to them that may or may not be graded . To get the most affordable diabetic life insurance rate , contact a specialist in diabetes life insurance and share all the information that you are asked . With the right guidance , you can get placed with the right product from the start and not have to go through needless frustration or declines .
What does it mean to be rated for life insurance ? Being rated means you have a health condition that does n't exclude you from coverage -LRB- declined -RRB- , but ads additional cost to the policy . Also known as `` table rated '' a person could be rated along a range of levels -LRB- tables -RRB- for an illness depending on their individual situation . A great example of table rating is diabetes . When I started 25 years ago , Diabetics were a straight decline for life insurance . No chance . Over the years , as treatment and severity of Diabetes changed , came a `` range '' of health levels that Diabetics can display . There are diabetics who have become healthier than the general population and there are Diabetics who every day struggle with control of thier illness . The insurance industry has figured out these two are not the same individuals health wise . A person with well controlled diabetes may fall into normal class range or low table rates , while a person with less control of their diabetes would be higher on the tabe rates .
Unfortunately , persons who have a high risk of having the need to collect on long term care benefits may be unable to get long term care insurance . E.g. . If they have already had a stroke , or have had an amputation due to diabetes , have Alzheimers , or have MS , they probably can not get long term care insurance .
When do most people think about applying for Long Term Care Insurance ? When they are diagnosed with a possibly crippling disease . But the best time to apply for Long Term Care Insurance is before that diagnosis occurs . If you have a family history of diabetes , arthritis , heart disease , or other health conditions that could eventually hinder your ability to care for yourself , you may want to buy your long term care policy before your 50 's . If you are extremely healthy , you may be able to wait until your 60 's . I agree with Ken , that the mid to late 50 's is a good time to get a good rate and hopefully get ahead of those pesky health conditions that often strike in later life .
Can you get life insurance with diabetes ? Yes , you can get life insurance but the cost is going to depend on how well your control of your diabetes actually is . When I started 25 years ago , diabetes was a quick decline . With the changes in medicine and treatment , diabetes is looked upon on a more individual basis . In other words your good health lowers your cost .
Yes , it may be possible to get life insurance with diabetes . In the old days diabetes was a decline , not even considered . Now most companies will look at an individual 's situation with diabetes to determine an offer . One thing though , once you start taking medications to treat your diabetes , you are a diabetic . Type II for 15 years myself .
In order to qualify to get a Long Term Care Insurance policy , you must fill out an application and take an exam . The application goes to underwriting where it is determined if your health is good enough to get approved . If it is , you are issued a LTC policy . Some health conditions that would cause a decline are AIDS , ALS , Alzheimers , dementia , kidney failure , liver cirrhosis , and Parkinsons . Certain mood disorders , moderate to severe arthritis , MS , advanced diabetes and/or heart disease , stroke , and other conditions that can lead to inability to care for one 's self are also potential hindrances to qualifying for Long Term Care Insurance . To find out whether you qualify for Long Term Care Insurance , call or visit an agent that carries several LTC choices and answer all their questions . It is much easier to find out ahead of time if you can not qualify , than it is to be declined later . This way you can also get the policy that has your best price if you do qualify .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For A Psychologist ?
Outpatient Mental Health Care is a covered benefit under Medicare Part B . There is a 20 % co-insurance for most outpatient mental health services . If you are a member of a Medicare Advantage Plan , you plan may cover that service with a simple co-pay . You have the option to have a individual therapy visit or group therapy visit .
Medicare does not have rebates . Are you asking how much Medicare pays a psychologist ? Or are you asking how much your co-pay is if you go to a psychologist ? If you are on original Medicare you can go to a psychologist . If you have a Medigap plan it will pay all co-pays .
The short answer to this question is `` some times . '' Psychology is usually is covered by most health insurance plans , but not always . It is also important to note that most insurance policies will have a limit on the number of visits that are covered each year , and that not all psychologists accept all health insurance policies . Before seeking care from a psychologist , you should make sure they accept your personal health insurance policy , and also contact your insurance provider or consult your policy to find out if there are any limits on the number of visits covered each calendar year . Some companies may also require you to see your primary care doctor in order to receive a referral to see a psychologist . If you do not yet have health coverage , I would encourage you to consult an independent licensed , certified health insurance agent that can review your situation and make a recommendation on which policy would be best for you based on your personal needs .
No , Medicare does not pay for LPC 's , or Licensed Professional Counselors , at this point in time . Legislation has been proposed to include payment for LPC 's under Medicare part B . As of now , only Licensed Clinical Social Workers , PhD Psychologists , and Psychiatrists are able to be reimbursed by Medicare for persons needing counseling .
Medicare has limited mental health coverage . Medicare Part A covers inpatient care , while Part B covers outpatient care . Care provided by psychologists , psychiatrists , social workers and other qualified mental health practitioners are included . Individual and family therapy is included , as is psychological testing , counseling , medication management and some prescription drugs .
I think what you mean to ask is will health insurance cover the services provided by a psychiatrist and the answer is maybe but most likely yes . You should contact your insurer 's customer service department to get further clarification on this . You should also be very specific when it comes to discussing the type of care you are seeking . Psychiatrists mostly deal in medication management and do not often engage in psycho therapy . If you are looking for that service , you are usually looking for services from a psychologist or counselor .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare coinsurance is the amount you must pay after satisfying your Medicare Part A or Part B deductible . Medicare Part A has a per admission deductible -LRB- $ 1184 in 2013 -RRB- . After paying your deductible most hospital charges are covered by Medicare for the first 60 days . After that Medicare pays a portion and you pay the rest -LRB- coinsurance -RRB- . Medicare Part B also has a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- . After that , Medicare pays 80 % of approved plans and you pay the coinsurance , or the remaining 20 % .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can You Apply For A Medicare Card Online ?
You can sign up for Medicare by going to the social security website , ssa.gov , and go to Medicare under the benefits tab . From there , there will be instructions provided to guide you through the sign-up process on the website . You can also go down to your local social security administration office as well .
First , you must find out if you are eligible for a Medicare Card . Medicare.gov use an online calculator to determine who gets a Medicare Card . You enter your date of birth on this website . To qualify , you must pay Medicare taxes for at least 10 years . You also have to be age 65 or older . Individuals can qualify if they also have a special condition or if they are disable under the Medicare definition . You can visit your local social security office or call 1-800-325-0778 to find out how to get a card . Basically , on the website , you sign-up and then you choose a plan or the coverage you need . Then , fill out the initial enrollment form questions and Medicare will send you a card .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
Once you sign up to receive Medicare benefits -LRB- this can be done online at the social security website , ssa.gov -RRB- , they will send you your Medicare card -LRB- it 's a red , white , and blue card -RRB- in the mail . I do n't believe they allow you to download one to print off . Mailing the card to you is the standard procedure .
This is a good question . You can use your Medicare card when it is effective , If you look at your red , white and blue card it will show Part A and Part B effective dates on the card . You can use your card at the doctors office , hospital , etc. if you are on original Medicare , that is , you only have Medicare part A and part B . If you have a Part C plan -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- you will use that card instead .
You can laminate your Medicare card ; there is no ruling against doing so . The Social Security Administration advises against laminating your Social Security card because of security features built into the card . But the Medicare card does not have these features , so your Medicare card can be laminated . Some feel that it interferes with scanning , but there is usually no problem with scanning a laminated card .
Some health insurance ID cards are instant -LRB- available online -RRB- once your coverage has been approved or on the effective date . Most carriers still mail policies , certificates of coverage and ID cards direct to the policyholder . If cards are mailed you should receive the card within 2-3 weeks of approval of your application or enrollment form .
In Australia , a blue Medicare card is an interim card issued to individuals or families eligible for Medicare in that country . Some people in the United States may call a Medicare Supplement card from Blue Cross Blue Shield a blue Medicare card . However , Medicare cards in the US are red white and blue .
You can laminate your Medicare card , but why do that ? Even though CMS -LRB- Medicare -RRB- `` requires '' you to carry your Medicare card at all times it is not a good idea . Medicare identity theft is big business and plays a major role in Medicare fraud . Rather than carrying your Medicare card , make a copy of the card and blot out the last 4 digits .
Some insurance companies will not accept credit cards for payment of premiums . Some will . Typically if you pay your premiums annually , semi-annually or quarterly many providers will accept credit card payment . It seems the biggest issue with credit cards is that people tend to forget about updating their information as needed with the companies they pay by credit card . When a card expires and is replaced with a new expiration date , the previous card is no longer useable . Sometimes people will delete a credit card account that was being used for automatic payments and not inform their creditor of a replacement card . It creates a lot of accounting headaches . So insurance companies prefer to debit from checking or savings accounts .
Medicare cards are valid for as long as you have them . In the United States , Medicare cards do not have an expiration date . If you lose them , you can order a replacement Medicare card . But other than for that purpose , there is not a need to order a new Medicare card .
Yes , Medicare cards can be laminated . There are no features of a Medicare card that laminating will change or render unusable , as there is with a Social Security card . So it is OK to laminate a Medicare card .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
Go to WEBSITELINK to apply for Medicare online . This page is the government page to apply for Medicare online . You can not use this page is you want to activate your social security at the same time . This page is for Medicare online enrollment only . If you already have Medicare Part A and want to sign up for Medicare Part B you should call Social Security at -LRB-800-RRB-772-1213 to activate your Part B coverage .
This is a great question . You should be able to get a replacement card by calling Medicare at 1-800-Medicare or you can go online to Medicare.gov and there should be a link for you to click . You may also be able to apply at your local social security office or call 1-800-772-1213 . Hope this helps .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
You can apply for life insurance online in several ways . Sometimes you can fill out the entire application online . More commonly , you find a quote online , then an agent contacts you to be sure you qualify for that quote . Sometimes agents can even find you a lower quote than what you found on their own website . That personal contact can help in many ways , so do n't shy away if you are contacted after attempting to apply online . One phone call can be all it takes to get you on the road with the right application , and after that you may never need to speak to the agent again .
Medicare will allow you to make multiple copies of your Medicare card . If you want one of the copies laminated that should work most of the time . Keep an unlaminated card in your wallet as well for the times when someone decides that they can not take a laminated card . I do know that the cards get pretty tattered .
You can pay for health insurance with a credit card ... sometimes . I 'll clarify . Typically , when you apply for a new policy , there may be a billing option that allows you to make the first payment with a credit card . However , usually , with ongoing and future billing , payment by check or via mail is the preferred method . However , late payments can often be paid by credit card . Each carrier has its own rules .
This is a Good Question . Typically if your card is not automatically sent to you 3 months before your 65th birthday , you can apply online at the social security or Medicare site , you can also go to your local social security office . If you are working still , you may be able to defer part B . If you are in the Illinois , Kentucky , Arizona , Florida , Hawaii , Michigan , Montana , New Mexico or Wyoming , you can contact me ; otherwise contact a broker in your area to help you with all your options .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Qualifications Does Someone Have To Meet To Receive Disability Coverage ?
The basic rule of thumb to qualify for a disability benefit has more to do with your physician than the disability insurance company . A licensed medical physician must diagnosis you with an injury or illness so severe that you can not perform the duties of your current occupation . At that point the clock is running on the disability claim and once the elimination period is satisfied , benefits are paid .
Most people receive Medicare Part A premium-free because they have been paying Medicare taxes during their working life and met the 40 quarters requirement -LRB- equates to 10 years of working life -RRB- . Anyone who does not meet the qualifications for premium-free Medicare Part A would have to buy the coverage - the premium for Part A is $ 426 per month . The premium-free Part A requirements are : 1 -RRB- You 're 65 or older and you 're receiving social security retirement benefits -LRB- or are eligible for receiving them , but have n't elected to take them yet -RRB- , or you or your spouse had Medicare-covered employment through the government . 2 -RRB- If you 're under 65 and have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 months or have ESRD -LRB- end-stage renal disease -RRB- and meet certain requirements . So if you do not meet these any of those items , you 'll have to pay for the coverage . If you 're subject to paying the Part A premium and are under 65 , you may want to look at an individual health insurance plan on the health insurance exchanges instead . If you 're signed up for Part A , you 're likely signed up for Part B as well -LRB- Part B requires a monthly premium -RRB- . If so , I would suggest adding a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Part A & Part B. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medicare supplement programs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life Insurance covers just that , your life . When you pass , the beneficiaries will receive the death benefit you have in force . Long-Term Disability provides you a benefit while you are alive . So , no , Life Insurance does not cover Long-Term Disability ... . HOWEVER ... There are now some Life Insurance products which give you access to the death benefit if you have a Disability . Keep in mind , the death benefit is reduced if you use the benefit . The advantages are you pay only one premium for Life and Disability Insurance . The disadvantage is you take away the Life Insurance benefit and you have to meet certain qualifications in order to receive the benefit .
The qualifications for Medicare in Nebraska are the same as in the other 49 states . They are that you are age 65 and have paid into Social Security tax for at least 40 quarters -LRB- or be a spouse or ex-spouse of someone who does qualify financially , and be age 65 -RRB- , or that you have End Stage Renal disease or Lou Gherig 's Disease -LRB- with some qualifications -RRB- , or that you have received Social Security Disability for 24 months or more . These are very general ; you can contact Medicare.gov for more details .
Most people become eligible for Medicare at age 65 but there are some situations where someone under 65 can receive Medicare , as well . 1 -RRB- If you have a disability and have been receiving SSDI for more than 24 months , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare in the 25th month . 2 -RRB- If you have been diagnosed with End Stage Renal Disease , are on kidney dialysis or had a kidney transplant , and a number of other qualifying factors , you are eligible to receive Medicare . Speak to a representative for details as there are many qualifications involved . 3 -RRB- You have ALS and have enrolled for SSDI . Note : Railroad workers will have some different stipulations . For all of the above , contact Social Security at 800-772-1213 for accurate and up to date information .
Most people go on Medicare at age 65 . You can not get on Medicare at a younger age unless you meet the guidelines for qualification while having Lou Gherig 's Disease or End Stage Renal Disease , or if you have been receiving Social Security Disability benefits for at least two years .
If your parent is age 65 or older , they qualify for Medicare so you can not typically add them onto your healthcare coverage at that point . Depending on the particular health plan you are enrolled in , you may or may not be able to add your parent onto that plan . Check the summary page in your health plan and see what it says or you can check with your health plan administrator to confirm whether they allow parents as dependents on your family plan . If your health plan allows this , here are other qualifications you will have to meet with the IRS . You must already be claiming your parent as a dependent on your federal tax filing . The IRS dependent qualifications include : Your parent is under age 65 , makes under $ 3650 per year gross income , you provide more than half of your parents ' support for the year .
The eligibility requirements for Medicare are the same in each state . A South Carolina resident can apply upon turning 65 , or upon having received Social Security Disability benefits for two years , or when suffering from Lou Gehrig 's Disease or End Stage Renal Disease , and meeting the qualification requirements for each .
There are two qualification items that you need to address to secure disability insurance protection . The first is health qualification . Your health records and current health condition weigh greatly when applying for disability insurance and can affect the price tag youll pay . Youll receive an underwriting offer from the insurance company . The second is financial justification , where you will need to validate your income or compensation with at least the last two years of tax returns . Once your income is verified you can look at the maximum benefit and make a value proposition decision .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
Long Term Care Insurance policies pay you or the facility you are residing in for the care you are receiving in the event that you need long term care -LRB- LTC -RRB- services . You must meet the qualifications , and depending on the elimination period you chose on your policy , there will be a waiting period before payments start . Payments will end when the years you chose are used up or the lifetime dollar amount of the policy is used up .
A quick look at your pay stub will show you the source of most of the funding for Medicare . If that funding proves inadequate then congress will have to decide what to do next . Medicare is fully paid to all citizens who have 40 good quarters of FICA contributions or meet certain other qualifications dealing with disability . When you select Medicare B and/or D , then you will be charged an additional amount to cover the cost of that benefit .
There are several factors that determine what type of disability insurance you 're qualified for . To start with , you must be working . DI is paycheck protection , so if you do n't have job , there 's nothing to protect . Also , you typically have to be at least 18 years old and making a certain amount of money -LRB- varies state by state and company to company -RRB- . Once you meet those basic qualifications , your agent will need to know your medical history and your occupational information .
There are a number of reasons to be turned down for life insurance . I have elaborated on them in my article here , along with ways to avoid or correct each problem : WEBSITELINK In summary , they are : 1 -RRB- The product does not cover your health condition or other risk factor -LRB- such as suspended drivers license , recent bankruptcy , dangerous hobby -RRB- 2 -RRB- Your application is incomplete and no one points it out to you 3 -RRB- Something is in your medical records that you are unaware of , that causes you to be declined 4 -RRB- The underwriter asks for more medical records and no one provides them 5 -RRB- You have done everything right but your health does not meet the qualifications Being turned down is a frustrating , heart wrenching experience . You can lessen your chances of being turned down by using an agent or agency that understands your health and risk factors and puts you with the correct product to start with , then follows the underwriting process closely to make sure it is completed properly . Sometimes , though , in trying to get the best price , declines do happen . It is not the end of the world . There is usually something else out there for you . Find yourself an agent who vows to stay the course with you until you get what you need .
A special enrollment period for original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- is a qualification to enroll in Medicare immediately without having to wait for the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- if you did not sign up for Medicare when you were first eligible -LRB- turning age 65 -RRB- - enrolling during a special enrollment period would also allow you to avoid being subject to any late enrollment penalties . With regards to special enrollment periods for Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- and Part D -LRB- stand-alone prescription drug plans -RRB- , it 's a qualification to make changes to your program outside of the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 of each year -RRB- - Medicare supplement plans -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plans -RRB- can be changed at any time during the year . There are a number of ways someone may qualify for a special enrollment period , the most common one I see being a person leaving their employer 's group health insurance plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How to evaluate a long term disability plan ? It all comes down to the definition of what disability is . The best policies use the fewest words to define what disability is . The more words beyond that one sentence are really exceptions to the first sentence . The definition should be short and to the point . That is where you start and actually finish your evaluation . Why ? because the rest of the information does n't matter if you do n't qualify or if your qualification ends after a couple years .
Medicare does not offer long term care insurance or pay for assisted living long term care needs . Medicare may cover treatment in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- if you meet the qualifications . Normally you must be admitted to the SNF following a qualified stay in a hospital -LRB- usually 3 days or longer -RRB- and must be discharged to the care of the SNF .
Most people start getting Medicare benefits when they are 65 years old . Some wait until they are older to get Part B . Some get benefits when they are younger due to being on Social Security Disability for two years , or having End Stage Renal Disease or ALS that meets Medicare qualifications .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Get Life Insurance If You 're Pregnant ?
When you are pregnant , some life insurance companies will postpone taking your application until after your baby is born . Some will let you get a policy while in your first or second trimester . If you fit the weight guidelines , there are simplified issue policies that can be obtained into the third trimester of pregnancy .
All health insurance plans now cover maternity . They handle maternity just like any other claim . So how much it would cost you depends on the plan you get ... . What is the deductible ? What is the out-of-pocket maximum ? If you 're buying a plan specifically because you see childbirth down the road , consider 2 things : If you 're pregnant now , you ca n't get insurance because you 've obviously got a pre-existing condition . If you 're not pregnant now , and you 're buying a new plan , then you 'll have to replacethe planby January anywaydue tohealthcare reform . So if you want health insurance now , there 's really no reason to factor childbirth into the equasion because you 'll be changing plans -LRB- due to healthcare reform -RRB- before you deliver .
If you 're pregnant during the disability insurance underwriting process , then you will receive an exclusion for anything pertaining to pregnancy . After you 've had a normal childbirth , you can apply to have the exclusion removed . As long as you had no complications , it 's pretty easy to get the exclusion removed . But if you 're hoping to get DI coverage in case the pregnancy does n't go well , then that wo n't work .
You can switch health insurance pans while pregnant , but make sure to do your due diligence first . If you are increasing benefits and lowering maternity out-of-pocket costs then switching would be a great idea . On the other side of that argument , if you 're happy with your current plan and benefits you may find staying where you are until the baby is born serves you better . In the new arena of health reform and individual health insurance you can only switch during open enrollment or if you qualify for a special enrollment due to a life changing event . It 's best -LRB- pregnant or not -RRB- to find the right program and stick with it throughout the year to avoid headaches . For more information on how maternity is covered under Obamacare plans please visit www.clminsure.com
Yes , unfortunately , pregnancy is a pre-existing condition for disability insurance if you apply while pregnant . If you applied before becoming pregnant , obviously , then the pregnancy would not be a pre-existing condition . However , some polices may require that you apply several months before you become pregnant in order to qualify .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
Yes , there are some companies that require medical underwriting that will allow a pregnant woman to apply in her first two trimesters . There are some No Exam companies that will allow a woman to apply while pregnant in any trimester . You must be within the policy 's weight guidelines and not be experiencing complications due to pregnancy in order to obtain a policy while pregnant , unless the policy has very few health questions -LRB- simplified or guaranteed issue -RRB- , in which case those things might not matter .
Can you get disability insurance if you are already pregnant ? Yes , but not for the pregnancy . It is possible to get disability insurance while pregnant , but disability insurance plans use a pre-existing condition clause in the policy to prevent a person from going on immediate claim when they purchase the policy .
You can not get a short term disability policy that will pay for time off for a normal pregnancy and delivery , once you are already pregnant . If you got the short term disability insurance policy before becoming pregnant , they can receive benefits from that policy when you delivery your baby .
Yes you can get health insurance when pregnant , but there are limitations . There are three places to turn . You can enroll in a group health plan through your employer . HIPPA prevents group plans from excluding pregnancy as a pre-existing condition even if you had no prior coverage . You would enroll during your open enrollment . You can opt into an Affordable Care Act plan in your state marketplace during open enrollment . The policy would take effect on January 1 . Any pregnancy related medical expenses would be immediately covered . Medicaid provides immediate coverage for pregnant women who meet income guidelines . There are no open enrollment limitations for Medicaid .
No , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition , and you can not get maternity disability insurance while pregnant . There may be an exception somewhere , but it is highly doubtful . Even most group plans require that you have worked at the business before becoming pregnant in order to use disability benefits for normal pregnancy .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
If your daughter had health insurance at least a year before she got pregnant them yes , it will be covered . Read the fine print on the policy.If she tries to get insurance after discovering she was pregnant , then it is considered a pre-existing condition and she wo n't be covered unless there is a complication during labor .
Since disability insurance pays for time off for pregnancy and childbirth , being pregnant is considered a pre-existing condition and you can not usually apply for disability insurance while pregnant . In my experience , the application is postponed until after the baby is born , but you might be able to modify the policy to exclude pregnancy related disability so that you can go forward with the application .
Yes , my pregnant daughter was just rated Preferred Plus , proof that if you are in good health and your weight fits the guideline , any rating is possible . However , some companies do restrict purchasing life insurance during the third trimester , so be sure you are applying with a company that allows it before applying for life insurance while pregnant .
Every insurance carrier will ask medical questions when completing an application.Some carriers will decline applications for pregnant women.Many willnot ask any pregnancy related questions , so you may be able to purchase a policy while pregnant in many cases . Every policy will exclude coverage for any preexisting medical condition . That exclusion may last 6 to 12 months . That means your existing pregnancy will not be covered , but accidents and illnesses unrelated to your pregnancy may be covered . Policies covering normal childbirth are difficult to find . They are only offered through employers . If you have the opportunity to buy a policy it may be your only chance to get covered for future pregnancies .
I am not aware of any carrier that will issue a life insurance policy to a pregnant female . There are many risk factors to consider which make it impossible to properly price the risk of a life insurance policy on a woman that is pregnant . Every carrier I am aware of will not consider an application until the pregnancy has ended and the woman has been released from her doctor 's care .
You can purchase individual life insurance while pregnant . Most companies will not have a problem with the first two trimesters underwriting an individual who is pregnant and at that point experiencing a normal pregnancy without complications . The third trimester is a bit more dicey as most carriers at that point may wish to wait until after childbirth to underwrite . I have written and had issued life insurance for people up to the 7th month without any extra premium or restrictions by the insurance company . It is going to depend on the health of the person and how the pregnancy is going .
If you were to purchase a short term disability policy while being four months pregnant , there will almost certainly be an exclusion on your policy that will exclude payment if time is taken off for any reason related to pregnancy or childbirth . If you had long term disability in place when you got pregnant , it should pay for bed rest due to complications during your 8th month of pregnancy . Congratulations and best wishes .
If you 're pregnant , you can get quality health insurance from the top companies . As one of the nation 's leading brokers , this is one of the most common questions we answer . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- mandates maternity benefits , which means it is a required benefit on Exchange plans , The cost ? Cheaper than you may realize ! LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier health insurance broker for 33 consecutive years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Health Insurance Covers Artificial Insemination ?
Most health insurance plans will not cover artificial insemination , or any other infertility treatment . These procedures are considered elective . Sixteen states have mandates requiring plans to cover certain infertility treatments . Each state law is different . The laws primarily apply to group health plans issued in the state . If your employer is headquartered in a mandate state that includes artificial insemination , there is a possibility AI is covered .
Most health insurance plans will not cover artificial insemination , or any other infertility treatment . These procedures are considered elective . Sixteen states have mandates requiring plans to cover certain infertility treatments . Each state law is different . The laws primarily apply to group health plans issued in the state . If your employer is headquartered in a mandate state that includes artificial insemination , there is a possibility AI is covered .
The Affordable Care Act does not specifically address , nor does it require , artificial insemination . Therefore , you 'll have to check policy-by-policy to see if a carrier will cover artificial insemination in your state . Best bet is to work with an agent as he/she may know the answer offhand , or will certainly be able to get an answer quickly and come back to you with available choices .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most homeowners policies specifically exclude damages that are the result of artificially generated electrical currents . The do cover lightning which is a natural electrical current . Most specifically exclude damage to electronic components .
Life insurance is personal property . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is an artificial entity . It is sometimes in the best interest of planning for a life insurance policy to be owner by a third party or a trust . When an ILIT is set up and dated , the trust of the ILIT applies for the life insurance policy as policy owner . The grantor of the ILIT contributes premiums , generally through annual gifting or using the unified credit . When the death of the insured occurs the proceeds are distributed to the beneficiaries of the ILIT .
Here is the list that I keep on file for my clients : >> Fast for a minimum of 8 Hours Prior to Exam unless you are diabetic or have another health condition . If you do have a health condition we will discuss specific instructions for your case . >> Insist on Morning appointments only ! Blood pressure and exam results tend to be better in the morning . Many examiners are available on Saturdays as well . >> If you are sick on the day of your exam , cancel . We can always reschedule the exam when you are better . >> Take your medications as you normally would . >> Avoid alcohol for a minimum of 24 hours prior to your exam . Blood pressure , liver enzymes and more may be elevated otherwise . >> If you smoke , do not smoke prior to your exam . Smoking raises blood pressure . For cigar smokers and other tobacco users Some of the companies will give you a non-smoker rate but your urine sample needs to be negative for nicotine . Please call to discuss your case >> Your weight Check your weight in the days leading up to your exam . On the day of your exam , take your shoes off , dont wear belts , empty your pockets , wear light clothing . IMORTANT Make sure you ask the examiner what your weight is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to weigh you again . >> Your height Stand up straight just like Mom told you to . IMPORTANT Ask the examiner what your height is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to check again . >> Avoid Caffeine on Exam day Caffeine elevates your blood pressure . Avoid it for at least a few hours prior to exam . >> Cholesterol TIP Eat plenty of oatmeal and bananas in the week leading up to your exam and lay off the sweets and other cholesterol elevating foods . >> Exercise TIP If you exercise , do NOT exercise on the morning of your exam . Exercise may artificially raise your blood pressure . >> Water Drink lots of water to flush out your system leading up to the exam .
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities accumulate tax deferred and when distributions are generated the gain in the contract is taxable as ordinary income tax at the effective tax bracket rate of the annuity owner . If the annuity is owned by an artificial entity and not a person the deferral aspect is forfeit and the gain is taxed annually .
The good news is , Medicare is neither an HMO or PPO . You are free to use any doctor , hospital , lab , etc anywhere in the country . There are no networks , no artificial boundaries . Providers that accept assignment may not bill for excess charges . Pair original Medicare with Medigap plan F and you never have to worry about budgeting .
Assuming this question is addressing literally means companies purchasing annuities , there are a couple of talking points here . If a company owes an annuity , i.e. an artificial entity , they may be purchasing it for the interest rate , which is generally higher than bank CDs or possibly for their retirement accounts .
Medicare does in fact limit the number of chiropractic visits . You can only go while you are alive . Once you expire , so do your chiropractic visits . As long as your chiropractor meets Medicare guidelines for licensure , etc there are no artificial limits on care . A doctor gave a man 6 months to live . He could n't pay his bill , so the doctor gave him another 6 months . Ba-da-bing
A trained , professional paramedical examiner performs the exam in your home or office . This routine exam will include taking information about your medical history , height , weight , collecting a urine specimen for urinalysis , blood pressure , pulse and collecting a blood sample . The exam will take about 45 minutes or less . If additional testing is required by the insurance company such as an electrocardiogram -LRB- ECG -RRB- or a chest xray , you will be notified in advance . We recommend scheduling the appointment at the least stressful time of day for you . Blood pressure can be artificially raised by stress . It can also be raised by caffeine , tobacco and alcohol so avoid these for several hours prior . Limit salt intake and rich foods for 24 hours prior to the exam . Fasting for 4-8 hours prior to the exam is also advised -LRB- and may be required -RRB- but drink plenty of water . Finally , avoid strenuous physical activities for 24 hours prior to the exam .
Assume you mean a life insurance paramedical exam rather than a physical performed by a doctor -LRB- not common -RRB- . A trained , professional paramedical examiner performs the exam in your home or office . This routine exam will include taking information about your medical history , height , weight , collecting a urine specimen for urinalysis , blood pressure , pulse and collecting a blood sample . The exam will take about 45 minutes or less . If additional testing is required by the insurance company such as an electrocardiogram -LRB- ECG -RRB- or a chest xray , you will be notified in advance . We recommend scheduling the appointment at the least stressful time of day for you . Blood pressure can be artificially raised by stress . It can also be raised by caffeine , tobacco and alcohol so avoid these for several hours prior . Limit salt intake and rich foods for 24 hours prior to the exam . Fasting for 4-8 hours prior to the exam is also advised -LRB- and may be required -RRB- but drink plenty of water . Finally , avoid strenuous physical activities for 24 hours prior to the exam .
In general , Medicare does not set artificial limits for treatment on an annual or lifetime basis . So in theory , you will not `` run out of Medicare benefits '' . Medicare does require pre-certification for some items such as DME and may only authorize coverage in 90 day increments . Check with your doctor for full details .
No one knows the answer to that . But interest rates generally have cycles . Presently the government is artificially suppressing interest rates , but it seems reasonable that rates must rise eventually . Many financial planners are locking down interest rate periods of five years or less which may be an indication of their belief that interest rates will rise within the decade .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
Is Critical Illness Insurance Worthwhile ?
Critical Illness policies can be looked at 2 different ways . One as long as you purchase a Critical Illness that covers 10 or more afflictions at a reasonable price that can not be cancelled before age 65 , that can be good . Second , its category of insurance sales is among the lowest . Even though 67 % of Americans will be diagnosed with a critical illness and survive it , very few own this type of policy .
If you are related to someone with a health history involving stroke , heart attack , cancer , Alzheimer 's , or other illnesses covered by a particular critical illness policy , the policy will be more worthwhile to you than to someone who is not related to someone with any of those maladies . That is because : 1 -RRB- you have seen firsthand how those illnesses can impact a family financially , and 2 -RRB- you may have a genetic predisposition to those health conditions . Critical illness insurance could be worthwhile for the peace of mind it gives you , as well as the increased chance of paying you a benefit when you need it most .
If you are related to someone with a health history involving stroke , heart attack , cancer , Alzheimer 's , or other illnesses covered by a particular critical illness policy , the policy will be more worthwhile to you than to someone who is not related to someone with any of those maladies . That is because : 1 -RRB- you have seen firsthand how those illnesses can impact a family financially , and 2 -RRB- you may have a genetic predisposition to those health conditions . Critical illness insurance could be worthwhile for the peace of mind it gives you , as well as the increased chance of paying you a benefit when you need it most .
Many insurers utilize credit scores when determining the auto insurance rate a customer will pay . The reason is that often , there is a direct correlation and relationship with bad credit and higher incidence of accidents . Although the discount or surcharge may not be large , it is till worthwhile to be aware of your current credit rating and take steps to monitor and improve it .
Most renters policies will cover a lost or stolen Iphone . However , after factoring in the deductible for your renters insurance and how an additional claim may affect your insurance rates , it may not be worthwhile to make that claim . Speak with your agent or broker to find out how this claim will affect you .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for a wheelchair ramp . In order to find assistance in paying for construction of a wheelchair ramp , you could contact your local hospital , church , service groups , or Veterans Administration to see if there are contributions available that could be put toward this worthwhile cause .
what is a voluntary disability plan ? These are plans offered through your employer that can very much be worthwhile to the employees of a company . Underwriting is usually lighter , cost is competitive and for the more blue collar occupations , a voluntary group disability plan is a great idea as it is very difficult to get disability on your own with a blue collar occupation .
Most home insurance covers theft and robbery , subject to a deductible and certain limitations on various items such as jewelry , computer equipment and firearms . If you have more of these type of things than your insurance covers talk with your agent and for a small extra premium you can either schedule these items or purchase extended coverage . Always make sure you take your deductible into consideration before filing a claim . It may not be worthwhile .
The Internal Revenue Code reflects the will of Congress . The underlying laws consider saving for retirement to be a worthwhile endeavor . The deferral granted to an annuity means that the taxes will be paid when the money is withdrawn . However , the effect of the deferral accelerates the growth of the annuity . There are ways to not only defer taxes but also not have to pay them when you withdraw them .
You could review a number of variable annuities and compare them on the basis of cost , if that what you mean by best . It wouldnt be worthwhile to review them on the basis of results as each individual annuity owner selects the securities in the variable annuity . However , I think that the way to determine quality is to know the agent or adviser who is recommending the annuity . In the end it is their advice that can add to your wealth
The only `` equity '' is the cash value , not the face amount . Since the policy is only 8 years old there is probably not much cash value however you do have options . If you do nothing the policy goes on extended term . This means the policy is in force for a period of time until the cash value is used up . You can take a reduced paid up option , but I doubt if you have enough cash value to make this worthwhile . You can cash surrender the policy for whatever the cash value is . . All of these options are spelled out in your policy .
This is really a matter of personal preference . While the lower cost associated with HMO plans can certainly be appealing , anyone with an HMO only has coverage when they are using a medical provider in their network . If having your choice of doctor is important to you , and your chosen physician does not work with an HMO , or if you travel extensively and may need coverage away from your home area , then you will more than likely find the additional cost of a PPO to be very worthwhile .
You can make good money selling life insurance , or you can make no money selling life insurance . Those who are really good at it tend to attract more and more clients , and do exceptionally well . On the other hand , those who struggle tend to move on fairly quickly , because it can be a brutal industry if you are not doing well . Most people are paid by commission only , and expenses can easily eat up profits . When there is a split in commissions , the pie often seems too small . Most insurance sales people fall somewhere in the middle and make a decent living at selling life insurance . With some good breaks , they have years where they make good money . And if you like what you are doing , that can be a worthwhile career .
Yes , but it depends on which state you live in as some states restrict these types of plans . Something to keep in mind when dealing with the purchase of insurance is the fewer questions an insurance company asks , the more expensive the policy will be . Skipping a examination means fewer questions , which comes back to price , which would be higher . I should also address what 95 % of an insurance `` physical '' involves . A medical examiner -LRB- usually a nurse -RRB- meets with you at your home or another place that works for you , They will take your blood pressure , check your pluse , have you step on a scale , ask about your medical history , draw some blood and collect a urine sample . Usually takes about 35 minutes or so . In cases involving large face amounts and an older client , a full medical exam may be done . It is also worthwhile to note that the cost of these exams are picked up by the insurance carrier .
A life insurance brokerage is a business through which multiple life insurance carriers are represented . The brokers that are affiliated with the brokerage are appointed with different companies . A successful brokerage one that really gets the job done for the consumer should have certain characteristics . First of all , it should specialize in one product line : life insurance . The broker should be a master of his craft . He or she should be an expert in life insurance underwriting , because it is through getting good underwriting that you deliver the best value to your client . Good underwriting can give you the lowest rate/highest cash value accumulation . If the broker sells multiple products , such as life insurance , and annuities , and disability insurance , and investments , etc. , then he really is a jack of all trades and master of none . Another point is that the brokerage should be run just as any good business is run . You make commitments and you deliver on them . This means that the sales model of the brokerage should be to provide a quote about which they are confident the client will be approved . It is common business sense to quote a reliable price . Prequalification should therefore be an essential part of the service the brokerage provides . Clients are entitled to know the company , product , and price before submitting a formal application . Then all involved can be sure that going through underwriting will be worthwhile . A brokerage operation should be designed to make the purchase of life insurance a very satisfying experience for the consumer .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , is life insurance really worth it ? Well , that 's a good question . If I have financial liabilities , like indebtedness , a mortgage , if I have future obligations , like a college education for my children or my retirement , or I want to replace my income for my family if something happens to me , I think that 's worth it . How do I pay for that ? You may want to look at term life insurance if you have a temporary indebtedness or future obligations and it 's temporary , that could be your play because that 's the cheapest way to play . And that makes it worthwhile . If you have ongoing financial indebtedness or future obligations , or you need to replace income , or you have terrible intent , you probably need to buy a permanent form of life insurance . Depending upon what you 're trying to cover , I think that life insurance is absolutely needed and necessary and yes , I think it 's worth it .
Let me start by saying I am not a tax professional , never been confused for one and have never played on on TV ... However , you are able to deduct a certain protion of your annual medical expences on your tax return which can included certain types of insurance premiums . If you have a group plan through you or your spouses employer , no dice . Ca n't deduct the pre-tax portion you pay . If you have an individual/family plan that you personally pay the premiums on , then you could possibly be able to deduct those expences . There is a medical expence level -LRB- not sure what it is and I think it changes ach year -RRB- where if you exceed that amount , you are eligible to deduct the difference . Most families do n't exceed it , but if you are one of the lucky few that spend several several thousand dollars out of pocket each year it is a worthwhile conversation to have with you accountant . So , call your accountant or another tax pro and get there opinion on it . If you have a lot of out of pocket medical expence it could be worth your time and effort to investigate further .
I am assuming this question relates to whether or not a policyholder can deduct their auto insurance premiums on their Federal or state income taxes . Unless the car is used for business purposes , the answer is `` no '' . However , if you use your car for business purposes , and your employer does not reimburse you for the business use of your car , there is a way to deduct a portion of your auto insurance premium . The IRS allows two ways to deduct expenses for the non-reimbursed use of your personal car . The first method is the mileage method . The IRS sets a mileage allowance every year , and that allowance is meant to cover fuel , wear and tear , maintenance , insurance , and other expenses . The second method is to keep track of all of the expenses related to your car , and then pro-rate those expenses by the amount of business use of your car . My employer reimburses me for the business use of my car using the mileage method . I do n't know if it 's worth the trouble to keep detailed records of your car expenses to make the second method worthwhile .
When you are purchasing life insurance , the most important thing to look for is a reliable quote . What is reliable ? It is a rate about which your broker is confident you will be approved . Sounds pretty basic , doesnt it ? And after all , that should be your expectation when you buy anything , shouldnt it ? When you buy a house , a refrigerator , a car , a business , or even a pack of bubblegum , the amount you pay should be the amount that was advertised . The thing is with life insurance , you must be underwritten in order to come up with a real number . And underwriting can be very thorough and comprehensive . It involves current health , medical history , lifestyle , and many other factors . But if you must be underwritten before you know what the price will really be , how reliable can your quote be ? Good question . This means that your broker must pre-underwrite you . Before you submit an application , he or she must obtain all the necessary quote information . If need be , your medical file and other records must be reviewed . This data must be discussed with underwriters who typically are interested in the risk you represent . This all happens , of course , with your authorization . Once this research is completed , you should be provided with quote that represent commitments from underwriters . Not ironclad commitments , mind you you still have to go through formal underwriting . But they should be rates about which all are confident that , barring contradictory information arising in underwriting , you will be approved . Then you will know that it will be worthwhile submitting a formal application .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
end question
start question
life-insurance
At What Age Does Life Insurance Go Up ?
There are some life insurance policies that go up when your age hits 5 years increments . After paying these increases a few times , you could find yourself unable to afford the premium at a time when you are most likely to need the coverage . Term life insurance usually -LRB- but not always -RRB- guarantees that the premium will stay up for a set number of years , then often jumps up in price drastically and goes up every year after that . Whole Life and Guaranteed Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee will not go up in price as long as premiums are paid in a timely manner and the policy is maintained properly . As you can see , it is very important to know the terms of each policy before you purchase it .
At what age does life insurance go up ? Prior to purchase life insurance costs , no matter the product rise every age change . In the younger ages the difference is a few dollars . Starting around age 50 , the slope for cost increase starts to rise sharply . In your 60 's and above waiting can add thousands onto the cost of your insurance . By purchasing a policy , you can either lock the cost in for the life of the policy -LRB- permanent -RRB- or for a block of time -LRB- term -RRB- .
It depends on your policy . Premiums on Whole Life never go up . A properly funded Universal Life will never go up . Term insurance will go up at the end of each term . One year term will go up each year , 10 year term every 10 years , 20 year term every 20 years and so forth , assuming that the term policy is renewable .
Term life insurance goes up in price after the years for which the guaranteed premium have been completed . E.g. . If you took out a 30 year policy at age 30 and it was guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 30 years , it would go up at age 60 . If the policy was guaranteed not to go up for 20 of the 30 years , there is a chance that it could go up at age 50 .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
A Term life insurance policy is one that will have the same premium for a set number of the years in the term . Some Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium will not go up for the entire term ; other Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium can not go up for part of the term . E.g. 30 year Term life may be guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 30 years , or it can be guaranteed not to go up for 20 of the 30 years and `` hope '' that it wo n't go up the last 10 years . Term life insurance does not have any cash value . If you quit paying on Term life , it will end after one month .
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
Term life insurance may end at the end of the term , or it may go up in price at the end of the term . The end of the term is the period when the guaranteed premium ends . E.g. . If you buy a ten year term policy , the policy will end or the premium will go up at the start of year 11 . Because the premiums go up so high , most people do end their term policies when the term ends . However , if there is a provision for the premium to go up -LRB- called annually renewable -RRB- , it can go up to whatever age the policy dictates . Some are annually renewable as high as age 90 . Another option offered for many term policies is to convert the policy to permanent insurance . This must be done before the term ends . Again , the price per thousand dollars of coverage is much higher for the new policy than it was for the term policy . However , it is a good option if you can not qualify for new insurance , and you may be able to take a smaller face amount to keep the premium affordable .
Globe life 's big pitch is to get up to $ 50,000 of coverage for $ 1 . Sounds great right ? That 's only for the first month - after that you 're paying normal premium amounts . One of the programs they are famous for with this pitch is their `` final expense '' coverage . In actuality it 's age-banded term insurance going to age 90 . Age-banded term insurance can be cheaper up front for the first few years than a traditional level premium life insurance policy , but they become very expensive if you plan on keeping it long term . In short , you can end up spending a ton more in premiums over a 15-20 year period than you would have with a level premium policy . The major drawback that a lot of people never think about is the `` to age 90 '' part . This means that if you live to age 91 , your coverage terminates immediately and you have nothing left . And at age 91 , there are n't any carriers that will offer you life insurance -LRB- for any that would be , you would be self-insured within 3-4 years -RRB- . You would have to look at preneed funeral insurance at that point . Traditional final expense policies are guaranteed for LIFE . I imagine you would like your policy to pay out a death benefit even if you live to age 92 , 95 , 98 , etc. . . When it comes to final expense life insurance , I already recommend going with a traditional policy that features a level premium . It 's almost always the better bet in the long run . There 's many different products out there for final expense coverage so it would be in your best interest to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can compare multiple options for you and find you the coverage at the lowest rate . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much does life insurance cost ? '' Well , it depends on your gender , your age , your smoking habits , your medical background , your history . It also depends on the exam results that you 'll take when you go and apply for insurance . It also may depend on your vocation . Do you have hazards in your vocation ? And it also depends on , do you have recreational issues , like , are you a rock climber or a scuba diver ? It matters because those are higher risks . When you also ask about what does it cost , is it going to be temporary insurance , 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 years ? Or is it going to be permanent insurance going all the way out to age 100 , maybe even farther ? When you look at all these factors and accumulate them , they 'll come up with a number that will tell you , here is your price tag .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance ? Well , generally speaking , it takes about 60 days . You 're going to have to fill out an application . You 're going to have to take a paramed exam . They 're going to order attending physician statements from your doctor . So when you do full underwriting , it takes between 60 days , and sometimes , depending upon if the carrier is very popular , it could take longer , up to 90 days . Keep in mind , if you do n't want to go through the full underwriting process , you could do simplified issue or you could do guaranteed issue . That would cut the time down . What you 're giving up by doing that is , without full underwriting , you 're just going to be used ... the boilerplate that they 're going to use for simplified and guaranteed is not going to be as cutting edge from a price point of view . You 'll probably wind up paying a little bit more . But if you want to really expedite your issue and get your policy in place , those two ideas could be a way to go .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
1 -RRB- If by guaranteed life insurance you are referring to guaranteed issue life Insurance , that is coverage that can not be declined for health reasons . The policies usually have rather narrow age guidelines , low maximum face amounts , and are graded during the first 1-3 years for death due to natural causes . E.g. . If the insured person died of a heart attack during the first years of the policy , the beneficiary would receive a reduced death benefit -LRB- often return of premium , plus a little extra -RRB- . If death occurs after the graded period ends , the policy pays the full face amount . It usually pays 100 % of the face amount from day one for accidental death . Some guaranteed issue life insurance policy premiums are guaranteed not to go up for life . Some can go up every year , and others are in between -LRB- e.g. can go up every 5 years -RRB- . Keep in mind that you will want to be able to afford this policy in the years ahead , and get lifetime guaranteed level premiums , if possible . Guaranteed issue life insurance can be a good choice for people who can not qualify for any other coverage . Even if death is anticipated within the first two years , the return is better than any savings account . And people are often able to survive serious diseases beyond what is expected . 2 -RRB- If by guaranteed life insurance you mean life insurance where the premium and face amount are guaranteed , it simply means that the premium can not go up , and the face amount can not go down , for a certain period of time . In Term insurance , the guaranteed level period is usually for the term of the policy . In Universal Life , the guaranteed period can be for life , or it can be for a set number of years .
AARP does not offer any life insurance - they are only a marketing organization . They associate themselves with certain insurers and allow the carriers to attach their name to a product . For example , life insurance is typically done through New York Life while Medicare Supplement insurance is typically done through United Healthcare . One of my family members who is an AARP member gets letters in the mail frequently for life insurance with the AARP name -LRB- insurance through New York Life -RRB- . However , the coverage is age-banded and only carries the policy through age 80 - the coverage then terminates if they live beyond age 80 with no option to extend the program . Age-banded coverage means the rates change every 5 years as you enter into the next age bracket . They may have other life insurance products available with their name on attached , but that 's what constantly comes in the mail . If you 're looking for term life insurance , I would highly highly highly suggest consulting with an independent agent who can compare multiple carriers for you and discuss your medical history to determine the risk classification each carrier may consider you for -LRB- the risk class directly determines the premiums -RRB- . Shopping before applying is vital ! And there 's no cost to using an independent agent vs. going through a carrier directly . I would n't just buy on name as there are numerous carriers that offer term insurance who offer competitive rates . You can end up spending extra money that you do n't need to when you do that -LRB- that 's not to say a big name carrier would n't in fact be the best cost option , you just want to be sure you 're not overpaying -RRB- . The risk class is key to figure out first and then look at the rates for a given coverage amount/term length from there . If you do n't know what risk class you would likely fall under for a carrier , then a quote is nothing more than a guesstimate . Term life insurance is very straightforward . If you die during the life of the policy , the carrier pays out the death benefit proceeds . If you outlive the term premium guarantee period and and do n't want to pay the annual renewable term rates -LRB- which go up each year as you get older -RRB- , then you would likely either replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy or not have any coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Guaranteed premium life insurance is life insurance where the premium is guaranteed not to go up for a certain amount of time . In term life , this is usually -LRB- but not always -RRB- the number of years in the term . When the term ends , the premiums usually jumps very high . In universal life , you can often select a period of time where the premium will not go up and the policy will not lapse . If you want the premium to not go up for your lifetime , you would pick a universal life policy with the premium locked in to age 100 or longer . In whole life , the premium is usually guaranteed to age 100 , at which time the policy will pay you the face amount if you are still alive .
What age does disability coverage end ? It will depend on the contract . Disability policies can vary from ending at 65 up to age 75 depending on the carrier and what their contact states for an end date . Some plans reduce benefit or length of payout past age 65 . Depending on the company you choose your payout could go anywhere from 2 years to lifetime .
At what age does life insurance go up ? Prior to purchase life insurance costs , no matter the product rise every age change . In the younger ages the difference is a few dollars . Starting around age 50 , the slope for cost increase starts to rise sharply . In your 60 's and above waiting can add thousands onto the cost of your insurance . By purchasing a policy , you can either lock the cost in for the life of the policy -LRB- permanent -RRB- or for a block of time -LRB- term -RRB- .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Life Insurance Cash Surrender Value ?
The two main types of insurance that have cash value are commonly universal life and whole life insurance policies . These types of permanent life insurance policies build cash value by over funding premiums . These types of policies have many perks and riders . If you were to cancel or `` cash out '' this policy type the amount of money you would receive is known as cash surrender value . The gains on this cash is taxed as ordinary income . If you were to leave the policy in force and simply borrow the cash , those funds can be used income tax free . I would advise speaking to your agent or carrier about all of your options before cashing out .
Life Insurance Cash Surrender Value is tbe Cash Value of a Whole Life policy . The money accumulates upon the amount of premium paid through the years of the policy at a compounded value . The last percentage is more than bank interest . When the policy is surrendered or terminated in the later years which is best than early since hardly any accumulation or not enough value cash that accumulates will be surrendered to the policyholder .
Life Insurance Cash Surrender Value is what will be returned to you if you cancel a permanent life insurance policy that has a cash value available . This surrender value may be less than the actual cash value as all loans will be paid back & surrender fees will be taken . Beware , if the surrender value is more than the money or premium you have paid in , there may be a taxable event you will have to deal with .
The cash values in a life insurance policy is the money accumulated over years inside a cash value or whole life insurance policy . It can be borrowed against or received in a lump sum upon surrender of the policy . The cash value reduces the financial liability of the insurance company as it grows inside the policy because in most policies it becomes part of the death benefit . This makes a cash value policy a very poor investment for the client and , in most cases , does not provide adequate coverage to pay for final expenses , paying off debt and the mortgage , and providing income replacement . For those who have a cash value policy there is alternatives to restructuring to improve the financial situation .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
Cash surrender value in lie insurance is the amount of money you would walk away with if you decided to end a permanent policy before you passed away , or before the policy matured . Term life insurance does not have any cash value , so has no cash surrender value . In Whole Life or Universal Life , there is a surrender charge deducted from the cash value the first years , so there may be little or no cash surrender value until you have had the Whole Life or Universal Life policy for a few years . The amount of surrender value will depend on how you funded the policy , whether you had any loans out against it , policy performance , and length of time the policy was in effect .
The net cash value on a life insurance policy is the net cash value you would receive if you surrendered your policy . -LRB- Not including tax if applicable -RRB- With whole life policies this is the sum of the guaranteed cash value plus any dividends less any indebtedness . With Universal life policies , there is often a surrender charge for the first number of years . So the net cash surrender value would be calculated as cash value less loans and surrender charge -LRB- if applicable -RRB- . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When you surrender your life insurance policy , your coverage ends and you stop paying premiums . The insurance company will pay the cash surrender value of the policy which will take a week or two . The cash surrender value is less than the total cash value in the early years of a policy due to a surrender charge which is usually a charge that decline to zero over a period of 5-20 years , depending on the policy . Any policy loans outstanding also reduce the cash value . If you have any gain in the policy - cash surrender value less premiums - then it will be taxable as income .
When you say NWML , I assume you are referring to Northwestern Mutual Life . Since I 'm not a NWML agent , it 's hard to comment on the specifics of the carrier 's product , but can hopefully provide some general insight for this type of program . These types of policies typically feature a combination structure of part whole life and part term insurance . Whole life insurance can not be converted to an annuity , nor can term life insurance . If the policy was surrendered for the cash value of the whole life side of the policy -LRB- term life insurance does not build cash value -RRB- , the monies could be used towards an annuity . Please note , if there is a loan -LRB- and any interest on the loan -RRB- on the policy , any remaining surrender charges , the dollar amount you receive can be lower than the policy 's cash value -LRB- think : cash value - loans - interest on loans - surrender charges = amount you actually receive -RRB- . Also , you may want to verify whether there would be a taxable gain on the policy before surrendering it -LRB- the cash value in the policy exceeds the premiums paid into it -RRB- . Also , the only way a whole life insurance policy pays a dividend to the policyowner is if the policy is a participating whole life policy -LRB- non-participating policies do not offer any dividend structure - only the build-up of cash value -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! The surrender value is the money that the insurance company returns to you if you were to cancel or `` surrender '' the policy before it reaches it 's expected end . Term life policies will have no surrender value , as they have no value unless they pay out . Whole life policies build a cash value , and it is from this that your returns come . The surrender value is nearly always less than the cash value , as the company will collect fees and charges from that value before releasing it to you . Your policy paperwork will usually list the surrender value . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
For permanent life insurance , the policy owner has the right to borrow from the cash value subject to the terms in the contract . So , the owner can borrow life insurance cash values , even prior to age 59-1/2 , without a tax penalty as it is not a distribution . Loans will reduce the policys death benefit and cash value available for use . But use care here since if the policy lapses or is surrendered in full while there is an outstanding loan the amount of the outstanding loan is taxable to the extent that the policy 's gross cash value exceeds the policy owner 's basis -LRB- sum of premiums paid -RRB- in the contract . Policies that have a cash surrender value and have been in force for awhile have a maximum loanable value of close to the cash surrender value . Your annual statement may also have the value for loan purposes . Policies vary widely and there are many factors to consider . The best way to get a current value is to contact your life insurance professional or the insurance company directly .
The only life insurance policies that have the potential to be `` cashed in '' are the `` permanent '' type of policies such as Whole Life and Universal Life . Of course a cash value insurance policy only has cash value to be `` cashed in '' after it has been paid into for some time . If the policy has accumulated cash value in excess of the `` surrender fees '' the policy may be surrendered or ` cashed in ' , which will terminate the policy and you will be given whatever remains of the cash value . It may be in your best interest to take a loan against the cash value rather than surrender the policy . You should discuss your options with your Insurance Adviser .
The cash surrender value of a life insurance policy is the value you would receive before any taxes if you cashed in or surrendered the policy . Typically cash surrender value is generated in whole life and universal life policies . A build up of a cash reserve is necessary for level premium insurance to work . In Canada , you can attract taxation if 1 . You surrender a policy and the cash level exceeds the adjusted cost base of the policy , 2 . Borrow and the amount borrowed exceeds the adjustment cost base of the policy 3 . Transfer ownership -LRB- in most cases -RRB- Alternatively , if you wanted to access the cash value you could borrow for a bank using the policy as collateral . I suggest you contact a local insurance broker for assistance . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life Insurance Cash Surrender Value is what will be returned to you if you cancel a permanent life insurance policy that has a cash value available . This surrender value may be less than the actual cash value as all loans will be paid back & surrender fees will be taken . Beware , if the surrender value is more than the money or premium you have paid in , there may be a taxable event you will have to deal with .
Term life insurance is not designed to have a cash surrender value , however you may find a cash surrender value quoted on some term life insurance policies . This cash value is generally a return of unearned premium . Premiums on a life insurance contract can only be booked as as earned by the insurance company on a monthly basis , so if you pay your premiums for a period less frequently than this -LRB- e.g. annually -RRB- the insurer will refund the unearned premium if you surrender the policy . Outside of this , no term life insurance will not have a cash surrender value .
Answers above are correct , but thought you might like to know that 1 . The column that is usually titled `` Account Value '' is the cash value that is usually used by the carrier to determine the amount of loanable money the policyowner may borrow . 2 . When the cash value in the `` surrender value '' column equals the `` Account Value '' , it indicates that the surrender period or charges are no longer part of the cash value equation . However , if a loan is still outstanding , the surrender charge period could be over , but the loan would be reflected in a surrender charge lower than the account value .
Do term life insurance policies have a cash surrender value ? Usually they do not . Cash value is essentially needed in a policy to keep the premium level . You pay more in early years and some of the premium is left after covering the risk for the year and it grows the amount at risk to the insurance company decreases . Might be easier to understand the concept using a $ 100.000 non-participating level premium whole life . The cost of insurance at age 40 is much less than at age 85 . You pay a level premium and there is a build up of guaranteed cash that grows at a guaranteed interest rate inside the policy . If you were to die at age 85 , you beneficiary receives the $ 100,000 face amount of the policy . The cash value build up is not paid separately , but is part of the death benefit . Most term policies are as the name suggest are for a specified term . The cash value is theoretically there to keep the premium level , but there is no cash surrender value . Some policies with a longer term for example 30 year term policies do have cash surrender values . These are just general guidelines and you would need to check the policy wordings to be sure . Working with an independent insurance broker , you should be able to find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Almost all permanent cash value life insurance policies accumulate cash values based on the performance of their crediting methods . But they also have surrender charges , usually from the first 9 years to 15 years of a policy . The cash surrender value accessible cash values after the charges have been levied against the account value . It can be punitive to surrender cash values and may have ordinary income tax ramifications .
The surrender value of life insurance is the amount that the policy owner would receive if they terminated their cash value policy . There is only a surrender to permanent policies -LRB- Whole or Universal Life -RRB- ; there is no surrender value to Term Insurance policies . The surrender value is the cash value minus any surrender charges or fees that are charged .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Does Life Insurance Cost So Much In Nevada ?
If you find that the price for life insurance is high in Nevada , it may be because you are older , have a health condition , or are locking in the premium for a long period of time -LRB- such as happens with longer terms or permanent insurance -RRB- . It could also be that you are just hearing one quote and could benefit by shopping more companies . You can do that by visiting a website that offers instant quotes for life insurance in Nevada . There you will find the most competitive rates from a number of companies , for someone your age and health .
The State of Nevada 's Department of Business and Industry regulates life insurance in Nevada through the Nevada Division of Insurance . The Nevada Division of Insurance regulates both life insurance insurance agents and life insurance companies that do business in their state . They are based in the state 's capitol , Carson City , NV .
The Nevada department of insurance -LRB- also known as the Nevada Insurance Commissioner 's Office -RRB- regulates insurance in the state of Nevada . In every state the department of insurance or insurance commissioners office regulates insurance in that state .
If you find that the price for life insurance is high in Nevada , it may be because you are older , have a health condition , or are locking in the premium for a long period of time -LRB- such as happens with longer terms or permanent insurance -RRB- . It could also be that you are just hearing one quote and could benefit by shopping more companies . You can do that by visiting a website that offers instant quotes for life insurance in Nevada . There you will find the most competitive rates from a number of companies , for someone your age and health .
Yes auto insurance is mandatory in Nevada . The state of Nevada requires that your minimum liability limits be at least $ 15,000 in personal liability with a $ 30,000 cap and at least $ 10,000 in personal property coverage . Based on these minimums , you 'd be well advised to consider purchasing coverage that is higher than these amounts .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
Home insurance is not legally mandatory in any State including California . If a mortgage contract exists against the home , it is likely that the mortgagee requires at least a basic Fire & Lightning policy on the home to protect the collateral security for the mortgage . If on the other hand , there is no mortgage , it would not be adviseable for one to take the risk of fire or personal liability alone . One may purchase a Homeowners Insurance policy with a very high deductible thus generating a comparatively much lower rate in order to have coverage should a major catastrophe occur . Arizona , California & Nevada free quotes are available online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is intended to provide protection for Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and personal liability protection to those that reside in but do not own the home . The liability section of this policy form carries perhaps 15 % of the overall cost but in our opinion , it carries 85 % of the necessary protection . Especially for those renting in a multi unit building , it is common for negligence claims to arise due to water damage , smoke damage or fire damage to adjacent units or to the building itself . The liability section generally does not have a deductible and gives you first dollar defense up to the policy limits . A tenant could be sued for negligently over filling a bathtub thereby flooding the unit below causing building and contents damage ; there have been cases oftenants falling asleep while smoking thereby causing a fire . The personal property section will cover the tenant 's personal contents against Fire , Smoke Damage , Theft , Water Damage and some other covered perils . It is important to note that there are limitations on the value of Jewelry , Furs , Silverware and other valuables ; for those that have high valued items , a Personal Article Floater would be needed to provide protection . Also , it is important to understand that the peril of Earthquake is not included on a standard policy but may or may not be available by endorsement depending on the insurance company and State . For a free quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
Geico ` Government Employees Insurance Company ' underwrites Auto Insurance in all States . When it comes to Property Coverage , Geico has a wholly owned subsidiary that is an insurance agency and they act as an agent to provide quotes with selected insurance carriers who underwrite property risk . Renters Insurance is a very valuable form of protection that usually comes at an inexpensive premium . For those that are concerned about a legal action brought against them for negligence which is very common in the situation of tenants , it is imperative that you purchase the maximum allowed amount of liability insurance ; usually $ 500,000 . Depending on the State . An approximate 80 % of the premium will depend on your declared amount of Personal Contents and required deductible -LRB- we recommend no less than $ 1,000 -RRB- . The deductible does not apply to Personal Liability in most States thus allowing you 100 % defense and coverage -LRB- please refer to your policy for specific details -RRB- . For a Renters Insurance quote in California , Arizona or Nevada . You may use the following link : WEBSITELINK We will be happy to answer any further questions ! Happy Researching !
Homeowners Insurance is usually associated with the owner of the dwelling ; whereas Renters Insurance is specifically intended for the non-owner occupant of the dwelling . Renters Insurance is intended to provide Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Coverage for the tenant of a home . In a tenant occupied situation , the owner of the dwelling will usually carry Landlords Protection Coverage for the dwelling which does not offer any protection to the tenant . The tenant should purchase his/her own Renters Insurance . This is coverage is very inexpensive and is well worth it ; there have been many instances where a property owner has brought legal action against a tenant for negligence leading to a fire or other type of claim ; the Renters Insurance provides Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant which may provide defense in such an occurrence . For a renters quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you should find a licensed representative in your State for a quote .
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
Due to fact that critical illness is priced based on health and age of the proposed insured and because insurers all seek different degrees of risk , it is not possible to categorically declare on insurer or one plan as being the cheapest within a geographic area like a specific state . You should seek out the assistance of an agent who is licensed in the state of Nevada to compare the prices of numerous critical illness insurance policies .
It is not required to havehomeowners insurance in Nevada . It is requiredby mortgage companieswhen you have a loan for the home . There are many reason to have home insurance even if it is not required . Some benefits of having this coverage is that it provides you liability coverage , personal property replacementand addtional living expense . If you have any more questions about home insurance you can give me a call at 702-609-9290 or visit my website to get a quote . WEBSITELINK
Yes , homeowners insurance is available online . There are a number of underwriting companies that provide an online questionnaire to reveal the eligibility of the risk . For online quotes and insurance in California , Arizona & Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you may search for a licensed brokerage allowing you access online .
For residents of Arizona , California & Nevada , Onlie Renters Insurance is available at the following link : WEBSITELINK Renters Insurance is a valuable form of protection for not only your Personal Contents but also Personal Liability Insurance which will protect you from a legal action brought against you for negligence ; these claims may occur as a result of a Fire , Smoke Damage or Water Damage claim where the insured is accused of negligence causing the claim and therefore possible damage to the building and/or other units .
Currently in Nevada it is not required for an employer to offer health insurance to its employees . If you are looking at getting health insurance because your employer does not offer it at this time you can visit this site WEBSITELINK to get quotes for health insurance companies here in Nevada .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Should You Have Health Insurance ?
The purpose of health insurance is to protect yourself financially in the event of a catastrophic event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . This way you 're only paying a small amount of money and not stuck with a bill for 10s of thousands of dollars , if not 100s of thousands of dollars . Would you rather pay a small amount of the bill or take on the risk of paying the entire thing yourself ? For example , if you have a health insurance plan and broke your leg and needed to have a $ 100,000 surgicaloperation , you may only be responsible for a few thousand dollars of it -LRB- e.g. yourdeductible or coinsurance -RRB- , as opposed to being responsible for paying the entire bill yourself . How many people could afford to write a check for that amount without liquidating all of their assets ? Many health plans will provide additional benefits as well , such as coverage for preventive care , routine doctor visits , prescription drugs , etc. . I always recommend people consult with an experienced broker - we have an in-depth knowledge of a wide range of products available in the marketplace and can help you find the health plan that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of assistance . Thanks very much .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
In simple terms , a COBRA health insurance is a short-term continuation of the exact same group health plan you had with your employer prior to termination from that job . So , if you liked the coverage provided by the plan prior to termination , you will still like the coverage provided by the plan under COBRA administration because it is the same plan . What you may not like is the cost under COBRA administration . Many people incorrectly assume that COBRA rates are excessively higher than the rates you paid while employed . This is incorrect . By law , your insurance rates under COBRA can not exceed 102 % of the rate you were paying before termination . So , why does the COBRA premium seem so much higher than the premium prior to termination ? The answer is your employer 's contribution to your health insurance . While you were employed , your employer was definitely paying a portion of yours , the employee 's , health insurance premium . If you worked for a `` benefits rich '' employer , they may have been paying all your premium and even contributing some to your dependents ' coverage . Under COBRA , the employer no longer is responsible to contribute anything to your health insurance premium . You are therefore responsible for 100 % of your portion of the premium as well as that of your dependents . That is why the COBRA cost is more than you were seeing while employed . So , the real question then becomes is it cheaper for me to continue with my current group health plan under COBRA , or is there a better alternative in the personal health insurance marketplace . The only way to answer that question is to solicit quotes from personal health insurers .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
You need to provide more information , such as your age , health condition , and work situation for starters . No one can advise you based on the limited information you have provided and would be foolish to do so . This is a common mistake most agents make . There could be 10 reasons why you should or why you should n't buy this policy off the top of my head . Who is the carrier ? Please provide the reason you inquired in the first place , and what you hope to accomplish down the road by owning life insurance . The answers may seem obvious , but you would be surprised how things could look quite different once you organize your thoughts .
Health insurance is important because it is the way we finance health care . Health care is expensive with office visits , lab tests , x-rays , and surgery whether inpatient or outpatient . Most people do not have money saved up for medical expenses and therefore purchase health insurance to help pay for medical care . 80 % of Americans spend less than $ 900 annually on medical care and if you are young and healthy you may not think you need health insurance . Health insurance also protects us against large and unexpected medical expenses . The large health care expenses young adults have are usually caused by outdoor activities and sports where injuries can create high medical bills . Those are the main reasons why young adults should purchase health insurance to protect against larger unexpected medical bills .
I will presume that your question refers to individual health insurance coverage . Now that we are into 2014 and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- provisions for individual and small group health insurance are fully in effect your freedom of movement as a health insurance buyer is rather severely restricted . Outside of the new annual open enrollment period changing your health insurance carrier in mid-policy year is only allowed under limited circumstances . Change of life status events -LRB- which I have addressed in previous questions on that topic - please see my past answer history -RRB- , financial failure of the health insurance carrier you selected , or defrauding the consumer are virtually the only ways a person can change insurance carriers mid-stream . So , if you got on HealthCare.Gov during the last open enrollment period , purchased a health insurance plan because you liked the monthly premium but did n't bother to do your research and learn that your doctor 's , hospital or pharmacies are n't in-network providers then this is a classic example of `` Let The Buyer Beware '' and you will have to live with your choice until next year 's open enrollment when you can switch carriers . This is why the individual health insurance consumer should seek out the services of a qualified health insurance agent who can explain all the subtle details in today 's health insurance plans that the average consumer could quite possibly miss .
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
The only way to answer this is to look at your situation and determine why you should consider having Life Insurance . Here are some examples why you would consider having a Life Insurance . you are married . A life policy would pay off any expenses and help to maintain the standard of living you currently have or perhaps want to provide the means to improve the living standard . you have children . This is a common reason . Have coverage to support your spouse until the kids move out . Perhaps you want to make sure the children have the means to go to college if you were to die prematurely . your a partner owning a business . Life Insurance is used for Key Person & Buy-Sell agreements . Key Person pays the company for lost income if a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee passes while the company looks for someone to replace you . Buy-Sell purchases the ownership of your partners half that would otherwise fall to the family , surviving spouse . you have a bank loan . Sometimes , depending on the structure of a loan , you might be required to have Life Insurance which would pay the loan back upon your untimely death . This is one way a bank may minimize the risk on the loan defaulting . There are just 4 examples which are common . There are many other situations where it is good to have Life Insurance . Contact your agent/broker to discuss your situation .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
You can dispute a homeowner 's adjuster if you believe you have a fair and valid point . Simply ask to speak to his/her supervisor and explain your position and provide proof or documentation why you feel the amount offered in the settlement was not fair . Typically , they will study your information and discuss why or why not they will make a change .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
If you applied for Health Insurance and your application was denied , the company you applied to will have to give you a reason why it was denied . They should mail you a letter stating a reason . Since the Affordable Care Act was passed you can not be denied based on your health history , so as long as you are providing truthful , relevant info on the app , getting health insurance should be easy .
Under no circumstances can they term you without a reason . The reasons are also limited as to why the can term you . They can not kick you off the plan due to health conditions you acquired while you had the plan . When you hear rumors of people getting kicked off their plan because they became sick , they are just that , rumors . Failure to pay premium , plan discontinuation , employer dropping the plan , moving out of the plans service area are the main reasons a person would lose their coverage . They can not cancel insurance because someone has been incurring a high number of claims . I would suggest there must be some type of error with your cancellation . You should call the insurance company and ask them why they have termed you . They will have an answer whether it is legit or not is a different story but if they have termed you due to some error , you will be able to get reinstated .
Regardless of what type of insurance , if you 're asking why it 's priced the way it is , the answer is always this : it 's based on the actuarial data . Why is life insurance less expensive for women ? Because the data shows they live longer than men . Why is short term insurance less expensive ? Actually , I do n't know the specific actuarial data , but my guess is that the likelihood of your using insurance within 6 months is far less than if you had the insurance for many years .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Is A Medicare Levy Surcharge ?
If you are a senior with a high income you will pay a surcharge in addition to your Medicare Part B premium . The penalty you pay varies depending on your income from two years prior . In 2013 your total Part B premium could range from $ 147 to $ 386 monthly .
A Medicare levy surcharge is a tax on Australians that earn over a certain amount and dont have private health insurance hospital cover . This surcharge provides health coverage for you and your dependents , including your spouse , any of your children who are under 21 years of age , or any of your student children who are under 25 years of age . T he surcharge is in addition to the Medicare Levy of 1.5 % , which is paid by most Australian taxpayers , and is calculated at the rate of 1 % to 1.5 % of your income .
Medicare will assess a higher premium -LRB- surcharge or levy -RRB- in a couple of different situations . Medicare Part B premiums may carry a levy based on your income . Congress decided higher income people should pay more for their Medicare coverage . The surcharge varies and is based on your income tax return from 2 years prior . There is also a late enrollment penalty that may apply if you fail to enroll in Part B on a timely basis .
There are two , or possibly three , types of Medicare levy or surcharge that may apply . Medicare Part B will assess a surcharge on your Part B premium if your earnings exceed a threshold as determined by Congress . There is also a late enrollment penalty for Part B if you fail to sign up on a timely basis . A third kind of levy is on Part D if you do not sign up for D when you are first eligible .
A Medicare levy surcharge is levied against taxpayers in Australia who do not take out private hospital insurance , and who earn above a certain income . The Medicare levy is intended to encourage Australian citizens to take our private cover and use the private system to lessen the burden on Medicare .
There are 2 types of Medicare levy 's on the beneficiary that can apply . One is the LEP -LRB- late enrollment penalty -RRB- that applies if you fail to enroll in Medicare on a timely basis . The LEP is 10 % per year . The other is a penalty surcharge tax on high income earners earning over $ 85,000 or couples earning over $ 170,00
Short answer , maybe . Different insurance companies have different policies regarding claims surcharges . Some companies will surcharge for each claim . Some will surcharge for only non-weather related claims . Some surcharge following claims payment exceeding a specific threshold . And some have a forgiveness period based on how long you have been with them before they will assess a surcharge at all . This is a great question to ask when you are shopping for homeowners insurance . And because insurance companies ' change their procedures , it also important to review your policies periodically with your insurance professional .
Medicare Levy Exemption is an exemption granted to residents of Australia that prevents them from having to pay the Medicare levy if they are not eligible to receive Medicare . If an Australian is eligible to receive Medicare , they are bound to pay the Medicare Levy through their tax returns each year .
How much a surcharge you will receive for an accident really depends on the insurance carrier and the laws of the particular state you live in . Here in California all at-fault accidents are surcharge-able . If bodily injury is involved then California good driver discount will be removed along with the surcharge that is added . You can go from 25 % -100 % increase depending on the situation .
I believe the Medicare levy is a tax for citizens and legal residents of Australia , used to help provide access to healthcare . I do n't believe it can be avoided . In the United States , people pay Medicare taxes -LRB- also known as FICA taxes -RRB- during their working lives and get access to Medicare benefits when they turn 65 -LRB- or earlier for people on disability -RRB- . FICA taxes are typically deducted from a person 's paycheck and everyone is required to pay them .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . As my colleage said , each company is different and thus handles at fault losses differently . If your company includes a `` first accident forgiveness '' benefit in your policy , then you would not be surcharged . Some companies may not surcharge for the accident per se , but if you are receiving a discount for being accident free for a number of years , that discount may be removed at which point you would see an effective rate increase on your bill . Your state law may also be a factor in that in many cases , a certain minimum amount of loss must be met before a company may surcharge . If you are in a state where that minimum is $ 1,000 , then on a $ 600 loss , they would not surcharge .
You are exempt from Medicare levy in Australia when you are not eligible for Medicare at all , if you meet one of the medical conditions outlined by the Australian Taxation Office , or if you were a foreign resident or a resident of Norfolk Island for a full year -LRB- 365 days -RRB- .
In 2000 the IRS started the Federal Payment Levy Program . Through this program the IRS collects overdue taxes by taking money from a variety of sources . The cost of Medicare is a tax and it appears that the IRS can take that money from other entitlements that you might receive . You do have some rights under this act which you should review . Additional information is available on the IRS website .
It will not be `` illegal '' not to have health insurance . However starting 2014 the federal government will start levying penalties on businesses that have over 50 full time equivilent employees and on individuals who do not have health insurance either through their spouse , work , individual coverage , or are listed as a covered dependent on someone else 's insurance policy .
Employers with 50 or more full time employees are required to provide a government approved plan for their workers . Smaller employers -LRB- fewer than 50 full time -RRB- are not required to offer health insurance and many may not . Failure to comply with the employer mandate will result in fines -LRB- taxes -RRB- levied on the employer .
Employers employing 50 or more full time equivalent employees -LRB- FTEs -RRB- must provide a qualified health plan for at least 95 % of those employees or a tax of $ 2000 per employee per year -LRB- after thirty employees -RRB- will be levied on that employer . The tax is not tax deductible . This is a complicated law and there are additional requirements to consider .
Beginning in 2014 the PPACA , better known as the Presidents signature legislation , Obamacare goes into effect . Obamacare is a mandatory health insurance regulation that every American is legally bound to purchase , if they qualify under income means testing . If they elect not to participate , then the IRA will levy a penalty which the Supreme Court defines as a tax .
Almost all permanent cash value life insurance policies accumulate cash values based on the performance of their crediting methods . But they also have surrender charges , usually from the first 9 years to 15 years of a policy . The cash surrender value accessible cash values after the charges have been levied against the account value . It can be punitive to surrender cash values and may have ordinary income tax ramifications .
The Internal Revenue Service under IRC Section 6331 has the authority to seize retirement accounts to satisfy federal taxes owed by plan participants in specific scenarios . In general terms , the IRS will mail Forms 668-W or Forms 668-A , which is a notice of levy , to the retirement plan administrator to seize assets . It is extremely important to engage a tax attorney or enrolled agent to represent your interests in a dispute with the Service .
That is a great question ! The answer is you really do n't want to . First , most States will require that the car be licensed and registered in the same State , and levy fines or license suspensions if they find it is n't . The insurance company will more often than not deny a claim , or even cancel your policy if they find that you misrepresented where the car was being used . All in all , it 's not a good idea . Thanks for asking , though !
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does Life Insurance Typically Cost ?
The best way to see what life insurance would typically cost for you is to go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes , and experiment with different face amounts and term lengths . Typically , most people do not qualify for the best rate class , and and you will be seeing the most competitive rates in the industry . But it will give you an idea .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
There is no typical cost for long term care insurance because the types of policies vary so much . Some parts of the country have much higher long term care charges than others , so some people must purchase much higher benefits than others . The cost also depends on the features chosen , including face amount , elimination period , and riders . Finally , the cost varies according to the age and health of the applicant . To find the best priced long term care insurance for you , contact a broker who can compare several companies , face amount , and features . That is the only way to know the typical cost for you .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How much is the average renter 's insurance premium ? Not much ! Renter 's insurance typically is inexpensive and costs about $ 100 - $ 240 per year , depending on where you live and how much contentcoverageyou need . Of course , there are many other variables including other types of insurance you have with the carrier , your credit and past claims history .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
How much investment advisors charge will depend on not only the type of service they are providing , but the amount of assets involved as well as the how the advisors charge -LRB- hourly , flat fee , percentage of assets -RRB- . Hourly Rate : Advisors may charge an hourly rate for building a financial plan or reviewing an existing one . The hourly rate will depend on the skill level of work involved . A typical range of this rate would be $ 200 - $ 500 per hour Flat Fee : Advisor may charge a simple set price to complete a task , such as building a financial plan . The rate might be $ 500 or $ 5,000 depending on the complexity of the plan . Percentage of Assets : To manage funds in a client 's portfolio , an investment advisor may charge a set percentage of the amount of assets being managed . A typical range is 0.5 % to 2.0 % of assets . Typically , the higher the amount of assets being managed , the lower the overall fee percentage rate . Each Investment Advisor must disclose their method -LRB- s -RRB- of charging and the fee schedule when engaging in a relationship with the client . But , it does n't hurt to ask the advisor upfront .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
Health Insurance would cost a premium , which is a monthly cost paid by the insured -LSB- person purchasing insurance -RSB- . There are a few factors that are consider when calculating a premium . Typical questions our agency asks are : Is this an individual policy or family ? Who should be covered by the policy and what are the dates of birth for each person you would like to have covered ? What is you home zip code ? Do you want an HMO or PPO ? Now that the Affordable Care Act is available , if you would like to determine if you qualify for premium assistance , we need to know your household size and your household income . There is a grid based on household size and income that determines if you qualify for premium assistance and how much you can get . All of those factors contribute to How much Health Insurance Costs ! Its a custom answer .
Asking how much life insurance cost is like asking a realtor how much a house costs . Could be $ 30,000 or $ 30 million it depends on what you want . The factors that an agent or life insurance company would need to begin the quoting process is type of policy , how much face amount , for how long , age , build , state of residence , tobacco use andgeneral health status . From there an agent or broker can get fairly close to a premium quote but understand the underwriters have the final say on your unique premium .
If you have a `` hospitalization '' policy which may also be referred to as Health Insurance coverage all the policies typically has a section in which they state how much they pay for a semi-private room , ICU , and NICU . This type of policy alos provides coverage for all other services that would covered while an inpatient at the hospital . These coverages are typically stated like `` so much per day '' or `` at a % of total charges . There are `` indemnity policies '' that pay an charge for the room which is typically chosen by the applicant at the time of applying for the coverage . There is another policy referred to as a `` critical care policy '' which is also an indemnity type policy that states they pay some flat amount for a given number of days if you are an inpatient in the hospital .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Add My Father To My Health Insurance ?
You would n't be able to add a parent to your health insurance plan because there are only certain dependents that are allowed to be added to your health plan - your spouse and your children/step-children . Since you can no longer be declined for health insurance due to a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue , your parents would be able to secure their own health insurance coverage . They may have group health insurance available through their employer if they 're still working . If they 're 65 or older , they would have Medicare as an option as well . I hope that helps answer your question . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Can you add your father onto your health insurance plan ? In most all cases the answer would be no . It will depend on what your plan allows in the dependent section . That would be where you start your review of this question . At this time I do not know of any plan that will allow a person to enroll as a dependent their parent .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
Both Michael and Dan have provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As both Gentleman have indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a term within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Mr. Erickson has provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As Mr. Erickson has indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a requirement within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
As Larry mentioned , not every 25 year old is the same . At 25 , I was married and was a father of my first -LRB- of two -RRB- children . I owned a home , had responsibilities I felt needed protection from my early death . Life insurance for me , at 25 was a wise choice to make . That said , at 19 I also had life insurance . Not as much as at 25 , but enough to make sure if something happened , my parents would n't have to have a financial loss to go along with the loss of their son . It is said that single people do n't need life insurance , but I think very few people are truly single . Someone has to take care of things when you pass . How difficult you want to make an already difficult situation is up to you .
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
I feel like the poster child for this question with my father recently passing away at age 84 with 5 small , obscure , life insurance policies for which my mom just got paid . One was taken out when he was 16 years old from a company that we never heard of . I entered the name of the original company in a search engine and quickly found the name of the company now in charge of the policy . Our funeral director tracked it down . If you have the name of the company , you will find the money . If you do not have the policy number or do not know whether the deceased person even had life insurance , you can start by digging in their records and talking to relatives to see if the deceased person mentioned any to them . I have had calls from people who found my email on their relatives ' computers , asking if their loved ones had responded to the quotes I had given them . If all fails , life insurance that goes unclaimed can end up in the files of the state where it was purchased , after a few years . Check out this website for more information : WEBSITELINK
I previously posted this piece in response to a renter insurance question . I am sharing it here , hoping that it might be of value in answer to this inquiry . Mr. Pipes provides a good summary before me and concludes with an important question . I am adding this message with a personal example of the value of this coverage . Renters insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and several other common loss circumstances . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Yes , you can take out a life insurance on your father if your father consents to it and if the amount is considered financially justifiable . Your father will need to sign the application as the Insured even if you own the policy . If he owns the policy , he can get as much life insurance as his income supports . If you own the policy , you can get as much as is needed for his final expenses . If you want to purchase more than that on your father , you will most likely need to show that you receive some financial support from your father that would be lost if he were to pass , or that you contribute to his support and would get some of that back through life insurance .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
I have been a Certified Preplanning Consultant and preplanned over $ 1,000,000 of funerals through a local funeral home , with many of them funding their funerals at the same time . It gave me a deep appreciation and understanding for what is needed , and the creative ways that people pay for , their final expense needs . I have come to believe that purchasing a life insurance policy on your own is an excellent way to pay funeral costs . You can assign the policy to the funeral home , if you wish , with a stipulation that the remainder of the death benefit go to your beneficiaries . This is even allowable in a Medicaid spend down . To ensure that your funeral costs do not exceed that amount , you may pick out the items for your funeral or memorial service , and sign a contract for the cost -LRB- the funeral home will probably want to add a modest increase each year , so your policy will need to be little larger than the cost of the funeral you have chosen -RRB- . Or you may leave the proceeds to a family member who you trust to pay for the type of services you desire . Again , the excess death benefit can go to pay for other costs associated with your passing , or to your beneficiary 's personal needs . When my father died last year , our funeral director went so far as to submit the death claim for us . Dad 's having personal life insurance for that purpose was a huge blessing to our family . I highly recommend it .
Long Term Care Insurance is a good purchase if there is a risk of needing nursing home , assisted living , or home health care in your future . My father waited too long to get long term care insurance , and no longer qualified for it . It would have been nice to have that extra income to help my mom care for him . There are so many ways that people can be laid up , and hospitals are reluctant to allow people to stay too long . So long term care insurance can be a very good purchase for helping those who need the care , and for those who give it .
My father passed away recently at age 84 , and a policy that he had gotten at age 16 , paid . My mom said it was a poignant time for her . Steps you are taking now can show your love , and benefit those you leave behind , far into the future .
One of the big advantages of life insurance is that it does not have to go through probate . My father died about a year ago , and he had several small life insurance policies . My mom was truly surprised that she had quick access to those funds to pay for Dad 's funeral , without having to wait for probate -LRB- which still has not been completed , as far as I know -RRB- . And surprised again when she just found out for sure that she did not have to pay any taxes on them . No matter how much you trust your agent , it is collecting on life insurance that can make believers of anyone .
My father passed away this February and my mom got the benefits from his policies a few weeks after submitting the death claims . Getting the certified death certificate to submit with the death claim actually took about as long as getting the life insurance payments did . One of these policies was taken out in 1945 . Life insurance is an amazing thing .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Does Social Security Fit In A Retirement Plan ?
Social Security is the only retirement plan for many Americans . The federal program is also a main stay supplemental retirement plan for other Americans who participate in employer or individual plans . When qualified plans distribute income it is taxed as ordinary income at the plan participant 's effective tax bracket rate and is includable in the provisional income test for Social Security benefit taxation .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
Hopefully , it will not fit in too much . Each year we hear about Social Security drying up as people are living longer and drawing benefits longer . Keep in mind that Social Security will not affect what you get from your pension , profit sharing , savings and other assets you have to draw from upon your retirement . Its just that the benefits are drawing up for people like you and me who will be retiring in the future . You should contact the Social Security office and get a printout of what you anticipated benefits will be so that you can budget . This will help you better plan your retirement .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
Retirement , Survivors , and Disability Insurance is a reference to three of the benefits that Social Security pays to those who have paid into Social Security taxes . The `` retirement '' part refers to Social Security income that people get when they retire . the `` survivors '' part refers to the Social Security income benefits paid to dependents of a qualified deceased person . And the `` disability '' part refers to Social Security Disability benefits disabled persons receive if they are qualified .
Social Security is affected by income you receive during retirement . There are ways to maximize your retirement income looking at when to draw on your Social Security versus using your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . What really comes into question is how is the taxation of your retirement funds going to cut into your potential income . Working with a professional who has specific knowledge in the Social Security Income system is a must . First I would recommend going to the Social Security website , set up a free account for yourself , and see what your estimated benefit is going to be . From there you can plan the best way to start using your retirement monies , keeping the tax liability to a minimum and to maximize the potential income you have available .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
You can apply online with the Social Security Administration for Medicare Part B benefits . The website for Social Security is www.SSA.gov . You can also visit your local Social Security office in person . When you activate your Medicare Part B it triggers an open enrollment period where you can apply for any Medicare Supplement Plan and not have to pass any medical underwriting . An Independent Medicare Insurance agent will be able to show you what 's available and help match a plan that fits your needs . There is a lot more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement Insurance on our website .
Seriously ? If you are Warren Buffet or Bill Gates or some other super rich person then you probably have no realistic reason to save for retirement . If , however , you are like the 99 % of other people in the world then unless your plan is to commit suicide after your last day at work you need to be thinking about how you are going to afford to live for the years and perhaps decades after you stop working . Social Security retirement benefits are highly unlikely to come close to replacing your income during your working years and Social Security was never intended to be a person 's sole source of retirement income . In addition , the financial viability of Social Security itself is being seriously questioned so it may not be there in the amount you would have expected and in the worst case scenario may not be there for you at all . For this reason a person needs to be saving money and investing it over the course of their working life in order to build up a financial nest egg for their retirement years . When you retire from your job your working income will cease , your expenses will not .
The social security number is a necessary method of identifying you and your record . Most insurers use this number to zero in on your identity . Unfortunately , your social security number is used to identify you and your record to insurance carriers , and just about every other kind of business that is granting credit or coverage . Would n't it be nice to be able to protect this one vital bit of information and have another identifying number we could use ? But I digress ... But , as identifiers go , the social security number is probably the best current way for your creditors and insurance companies to make sure you are really you . Insurance is making a bigger and bigger use of credit base underwriting and pricing every year and most carriers use credit to one extent or another in insurance eligibility and pricing . Companies are also using vast data base records of claims and driving history that are often cataloged by your address , your name , your spouse , former addresses , and even the prior owners and subsequent owners of cars you have once owned and insured . With all the potential for confusion , your social security number is one unique bit of information that is n't easily duplicated in these claims and records databases . So , in that one way , your social security number helps keep you from being lumped together with others who may have a similar name , owned your car , or lived in the same house or apartment . Your social security number has been tied to credit reports and your borrowing for decades so insurance companies use this number to be as certain as possible they are looking at your record and not someone with a similar name . While the social security number has now been exploited for way to many reasons of identification , it is good that you still have one way to separate yourself from others with similarities that can cause confusion in underwriting and pricing your insurance and that is a good thing . Hope this helps .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
You must have Medicare parts A and B to receive retirement benefits from DFAS . The premium for part B is deducted from your Social Security retirement benefit . Medicare A & B starts the month of your 65th birthday , whether you are receiving retirement benefits from Social Security or not . If you are not receiving social security retirement benefits you will be billed separately for the Part B . It is possible , although inadvisable , to refuse Part B . You shouldnt do that unless you are covered under an employer provided health plan .
Social Security Disability Insurance is a payroll tax social program . It falls under the pervue of Social Security Administration . It provides income to people who cant work because of a disability . Social Security Disability can be temporary or permanent benefit . Social Security Disability does not depend on the income of the disabled individual receiving it .
Social Security is a supplemental retirement plan . It is generally not advised that one plan to use social security as his or her sole retirement plan . Originally Social Security was designed to be an income plan for people who had lived extraordinarily long and were at a stage in life where working became extremely difficult if not physically impossible .
Social Security does not provide enough income to live comfortably during your retirement years . That is why we need to plan for retirement . By planning far enough in advance , you can save money and create income streams during retirement to supplement Social Security income . You can buy insurance to pay for long term care costs -LRB- including home health care -RRB- and funeral expenses so that you will not be a burden to your family . People are living longer and spending more years in retirement . Without planning , those years may be more stressful and less enjoyable than they could be .
Social Security is a critical component in your retirement plan . The provisional income test for Social Security benefit taxation includes qualified plan distributions and income from other sources . Retirement planning is an art . Cash flow after tax is the monthly name of the game for seniors . If you can you should work until age 70 , delay taking your Social Security until age 70 and your required minimum distributions until 70 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do Life Insurance Companies Test For Smoking ?
When applying for a policy that uses medical underwriting , most life insurance companies test for smoking through both a urine test and a blood test on samples collected during the life insurance exam . If you are purchasing a policy that does not require taking an exam , neither of these tests are done .
Yes they do . The urine analysis test captures cotinine levels a byproduct of nicotine . Amazingly enough it doesnt take many cigarettes to detect cotinine , so reducing or quitting cigarettes just before the test is futile . That being said , cigarette secession has benefits that many life insurance companies credited to the policy insured if they stop smoking .
It is amazing how a life insurance company can find out you smoke . They test urine and blood for cotinine/nicotine , if you take an exam . They usually do a phone interview if you do n't take an exam , so you have to state your smoking status both in writing and verbally . They may order medical records . I once had a client who turned out to be rated a smoker , and when I asked him about it , he said he did n't think there was any way the insurance company would find out because he did n't smoke for a month before the exam and even his doctor did not know he was a smoker . It turned out his wife had told his doctor he smoked ! He may have been able to contest that by taking a new exam , but he , of course , was back to smoking by then . If you smoke , just admit it . If you quit smoking later , you can apply for a rate reduction a year after smoking .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
If there is any written medical record of your smoking , like your doctor 's chart notes for example , chances are it will be in the MIB records . When you apply for insurance , you grant permission for an insurance company to check your medical records and other history and they may come across it there . Most all companies , if you are looking for best price will also test for nicotine in your system as part of the exam process . Those companies that do n't test , just factor it into the price . So you pay like you do smoke in those cases or somewhere close to . One thing to keep in mind if you decide to miss the right answer when it comes to smoking is that some states refuse to let insurance companies settle a claim at a smoker rate . They have blocked insurance companies from paying the lesser claim and require the insurance company just to return premium . In the case of smoking , these states even waive the two year contestability window . Always check for any special state conditions when signing off on an application .
Life insurance companies are not mind readers , but they do their very best to find out if you smoke . If you have a blood test , urine test , or swab , the presence of nicotine will show up in all those tests . If you have ever taken Chantix or other drugs to help you quit smoking , they will see that on your pharmacy record . If your medical records show that you smoke and you have a health condition that causes underwriters to order your medical records , the insurance company will take the word of what is written in your medical records .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
Through a urine specimen . They are pretty reliable . Interestingly , I once had a client who admitted to smoking on the application , but tested negative for nicotine on the urine sample . He was approved at non-smoker rates ! People often ask if secondhand smoke shows up . The answer is yes , it can . If you inhabit a very smoky environment day in and day out , and your body has pretty much reached its saturation point for nicotine , it very well could show up on your test . This is important to know . Sometimes people ask , what if I dont admit to smoking on the application , and wait a while after my last cigarette so that I test negative ? Well , if the application asks you if you have smoked in the last 12 months and you say no , that is insurance fraud . If they audit your claim and find out you lied , they can deny the benefit even if you died for a reason unrelated to cigarettes . A word to the wise should be sufficient .
Each life insurance company is likely to perform a blood test before issuing life insurance . Certainly for any amount over 100k . That blood test will detect nicotine in the system for the past several months . If you say you never smoked , the test will not go back that far , but other records will and they may check those . Lying to a carrier will result in termination for material fraud , although that may only go back two years from the application in most cases . Even vapor smokes now in use , are testable and show nicotine . Had a client have his rates increased due to smoking vapors . Be honest and find a company you can trust . Thank you . GARY LANE .
In order to prepare for a life insurance health exam , there are a number of things to do and not do . You want your health exam to to be as good as it can be to in order to receive the best rates possible and avoid additional tests , Start with a good night 's sleep before the exam and do not do any heavy exercise for 24 hours before , You may be required to fast for 12 hours if a blood test is being done . Regardless avoid food and drink -LRB- except water -RRB- for 2 hours prior . Drinking water before the exam is a good idea to provide a urine specimen . Avoid caffeine for several hours and alcoholic beverages for at least 8 hours before the exam . If you smoke , avoid smoking for at least 1 hour before the exam . Continue taking any prescription medicines and bring them to the exam for reference . If you are taking over-the-counter medicines , try and avoid them for 24 hours prior to your exam . Inform the examiner if you do take one and why you did . Abnormal tests can result if you are ill or under stress at the time of the exam . If you are unable to reschedule , be sure and inform the examiner . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes , life insurance does test for the byproduct of nicotine , called cotinine , in the urine and/or blood that is tested for a life insurance exam . Cotinine is a more reliable indicator of actually smoking a cigarette than nicotine is , as sometimes nicotine tests can detect second hand smoke . With tobacco such as cigar or pipe , a very few companies will disregard cotinine in the blood or urine as long as it it disclosed on the application and there has been no cigarette usage in the past few years . Other than that , the insured person who tests positive for nicotine/cotinine will be rated as a Smoker .
Yes , a part of the testing is for nicotine in the system . Some carriers allow for different uses of nicotine products and do not cost as much for coverage as someone who smokes , but still cost more than non smoker rates . This topic is a hotbutton in insurance as the pricing for smoking is significantly greater than nonsmoker rates , the cost differences encourages some people to attempt to deceive on the application . Some states specifically `` waive '' the two year contestability clause in cases where mistatements about smoking are involved . In my state , they do n't even allow the insurance carrier to pay out the benefit at the smoker rate , just return the premiums . One good thing is if you do smoke and want to quit , you can depending on the company , get a nonsmoker rate after anywhere from 1 year to 3 years after quiting . If you decide to quit smoking , inform your doctor so there is a record on file of this decision and good luck .
Some tips to prepare for your paramed exam start a couple of days prior to your exam . First try to schedule your exam early in the morning . It is best if you can fast , no food or water 12 hours prior to your exam . If that is just too long , at least fast 8 hours minimum for your best blood and urine results . Get a good nights sleep prior . You will test better when well rested and early morning is when your blood pressure will be the lowest as well as your weight . It is not a drastic change but sometimes a point or a pound can drop you to the next tier of ratings which leads to lower premiums . Experts recommend not doing any vigorous exercise 48 hours prior to your exam . If you work out regularly , go light for the 2 days leading up . Exercise can increase proteins , which can lead to false positives on your blood work . If you smoke , try to refrain before your test , as it can elevate your blood pressure . If you smoke an occasional cigar or pipe , you need to be 14 days clean in order to get the cotine out of your blood stream . A few life insurance carriers will give you nontobacco rates for occasional use , but you must test nicotine and cotine free to receive these rates . Underwriters test for cotine because it stays in your system 14 days longer than nicotine .
If you are applying for a policy that requires an exam , the life insurance company will check for smoking through a urine test and blood test . The byproduct of nicotine , called cotinine , shows up in those tests . Even if you are applying for a No Exam policy , the insurance company will look on your MIB to see if you have ever been rated a smoker when applying for insurance in the past . And you will be asked on the application whether you have used tobacco in the past year or longer . If you are currently smoking and say you are a nonsmoker , the policy could refuse to pay the claim if you passed within the first two years of obtaining the life insurance policy .
It is possible to hide your smoking from the insurance company . Chances are the underwriter is not going to poll your neighbors to find out if they 've seen you smoking . However , when you apply for your policy the company will require you to give a blood and urine test . Most of the time they are checking for cotinine with is a metabolite of nicotine . Lying about your smoking on a life insurance application is a material misrepresentation . Life insurance companies can challenge paying claims in cases of fraud . Some courts have determined that lying about smoking usage to get a lower rate is fraud .
Fully underwritten life insurance requires blood and urine tests for a variety of medical items . Urine analysis can detect smoking behavior by testing for cotinine a byproduct of tobacco in cigarettes . Cigarette smoking can impact your life expectancy , so the life insurance company charges more because your life span is less based on the statistics of smokers .
When applying for a policy that uses medical underwriting , most life insurance companies test for smoking through both a urine test and a blood test on samples collected during the life insurance exam . If you are purchasing a policy that does not require taking an exam , neither of these tests are done .
Life insurance agents and underwriters do not have a crystal ball that reveals that you had a cigarette that morning . But they do all they can to find out if you are a smoker , and rely on your honesty for the rest . Blood tests , urine tests , swabs , questions on the application , phone interviews , doctor records ... nearly all policies use one or more of these methods to determine if you smoke . It 's best to just fess up , and then if you quit , apply for a nonsmoker rate a year after you quit smoking .
Life insurance companies do test for THC , the chemical in the blood that is deposited after smoking or ingesting pot . If they find THC in the blood , they will ask you to fill out a drug questionnaire , and from there decide how to rate you . With some companies , infrequent marijuana use does not affect your rates much at all . If you are taking a policy that does not require an exam -LRB- called nonmed or no exam policies -RRB- they will not test for pot . They do usually ask about drug use on the application .
Tobacco in the blood is indicated by a metabolite of nicotine called cotinine . Cotinine can be detected in a life insurance blood test for several weeks after smoking a cigarette , chewing nicotine gum , using chewing tobacco , etc. . The test for cotinine is also sensitive enough that it nearly always detects actual tobacco use , rather than second hand smoke .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is My Bike Covered Under Renters Insurance ?
Your bicycle is normally classified as personal property and covered under your renters policy . This would be particularly true if it is stolen from inside your residence . However , 10 % of the limit of your policy extends to your personal property when it is not in your residence , for example in a bike rack in front of Starbucks . The settlement for such a loss is , however , subject to a deductible . If your bicycle is very expensive this could be a valuable coverage , if it is like mine , you might not recover very much .
Ask yourself these question : If I came home and found that the apartment I was renting as my home had been completely destroyed by a fire , would I have the finacial wherewithall to fully replace all of my lost posessions with items of the same value and quality ? Or if someonetripped over my bike which I left leaning against the house while I went into my apartment to get some water after a long ride , and they broke their arm and I was sued as a result , do I have the finanacial strength to pay their damages ? If you answered yes to those , you probably do n't need renters ' insurance . On the other hand , you could have that protection for pennies on the dollar by paying an insurance company to protect your interests . Your choice .
That really depends upon many things including your age , where you live , and what your driving record and credit history happens to be . Certainly another factor is the year make and size of your ride . If you have your home and car insured with the same company , deeper multi policy discounts may be available that can affect your bike insurance . I am 58 , live in CT and have my home , cars , life insurance and bike insurance with the same company . I ride a 2008 Suzuki Boulevard C50 , have full coverage and high liability limits and pay $ 220 for the year for my insurance .
If the bike is stolen or damaged by a peril covered by your renters insurance the answer would be yes . It is considered your property and would therefore be covered . Renters insurance covers any of your personal property . Check with your agent to review the exact terms of your renters policy .
Renters insurance covers your personal property and bike is consider personal property . For examble you have a nice high end bike that cost $ 1500 it get stolen at the store you must call your insurance compay and file a claim they will deduct your dedutable from the pay out . Good Luck
Like other things relating to insurance , there are many factors that affect the rate one pays . Your location , driving record , possibly credit history and the number of other policies you have with your insurance company can all play a role in the final premium determination . Likewise the year of the bike may be a factor . So in general , it may be possible for an older bike with only liability coverage to pay $ 100.00 or less a year , and on a newer bike with both Comprehensive and Collision added , a bit more than that .
the information you will need to secure motorcycle insurance is very similar to the information you needed to insure your car . If you are talking to the Insurance Professional who is already serving your car insurance needs , you are way ahead of the game because all of your personal information will already be available . Next you 'll need to provide the year , make and model of your bike along with the engine size - 750 cc or C50 for example . The bike 's Vehicle ID number will also be needed as well as the value of the machine . If you have completed a Rider Safety Course , required by many states in order for first time riders to obtain their license endorsement , a copy of that certificate will also be needed . Finally , if your bike is equipped with an alarm or other theft deterrent device , certification of that would be needed .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses and will cover your personal property `` any where in the world '' . If your belongings are stolen or damaged away from your residence most policies cover up to 10 % . For example , if you have a Renters policy with the following limits : Personal Property = $ 20,000 Liability = $ 300,000 Medical = $ 1,000 Deductible = $ 500 If your bike is stolen away from your apartment you would have coverage up to 10 % or $ 2,000 . Keep in mind your deductible . In the example above you would receive a check for $ 700 - $ 500 = $ 200 .
There may be any number of reasons but perhaps key reasons have to do with the size and valuse of a bike vs a car and seasonal use considerations . Let 's talk about size . A motorcycle can certainly be substantial , but it is in general much lighter and has less mass when compared to a car . As a result , the relative damage that is could do to another vehicle may be less , which can therefore effect the liability pricing . As for physical damage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- here too , in a great many cases , a car may carry a higher value than a bike , thus effecting the comp and collision picing . Finally , there is the seasonal aspect . Here in CT for example , we can not ride 365 days out of the year like you lucky riders in warmer states can . Thus , because our bikes are on the road less , insurance companies may charge less because of the decreased exposure .
A stolen bike is covered under a renter 's insurance policy . Theft of personal property is generally covered subject to the limits of your policy . There could be some exceptions so it is always a good idea to ask your agent about the specific theft and what coverage you have in force .
A bicycle is personal property so as long as you purchased personal property coverage as part of your renters insurance policy there would be coverage in the event of a theft or destroyed in a fire or other covered peril . There is no coverage if you damage -LRB- wreck -RRB- the bike . Also keep in mind your renters insurance deductible will apply . Talk to your local agent forfurtherdetails .
Your bicycle is normally classified as personal property and covered under your renters policy . This would be particularly true if it is stolen from inside your residence . However , 10 % of the limit of your policy extends to your personal property when it is not in your residence , for example in a bike rack in front of Starbucks . The settlement for such a loss is , however , subject to a deductible . If your bicycle is very expensive this could be a valuable coverage , if it is like mine , you might not recover very much .
Great question ! Was your bike listed among your belongings when you took out the policy ? You can check on your policy to see for certain if it is covered , or call your agent . If your bike was stolen from inside of your apartment , or was securely fastened on the complex , in most cases , it should be . If there is anything I can do to help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
It more than likely would cover such a loss , yes . The settlement would of course be subject to your property deductible unless you have the bike insured specifically on a rider or a stand alone specialty item policy . In order to have such a claim processed as swiftly and fairly as possible , I would suggest having photos of the bike along with any paperwork that came with the purchase and a copy of a police report .
Just like car insurance , there are many factors that are used to develop a premium for Motorcycle Insurance . Your age , driving record , credit history and location as well as the year make and model of the bike are all such factors . In addition , if you have other business with the insurance company like your homeowners and car insurance , multi policy discounts might apply . I am in Connecticut and have all my insurance with the same company and pay $ 220.00 for the year for full coverage and high liability limits on my '08 Suzuki Boulevard C50 .
In most states , if not all , just like a car , if you have a motorcycle that you want to use on public access roads and highways , the bike will need to be registered and in order to register it , you will need to show proof of insurance . If it is strictly an off road bike , you probably do not have to register it and therefore insurance would be voluntary .
The two types of insurance are set up similarly . In that both can provide Physical Damage coverage for your vehicle including Collision and Comprehensive as well as Liability protection . Most bike policies are set up on an annual basis , whereas car policies may be either annual or semi annual issue . Generally speaking Motorcycle policies are somewhat less expensive than personal auto policies . There may also be some variances in additional or built in coverage , for example , a bike policy may include coverage for your gear .
Your homeowners or renters insurance may cover damage to someone else 's vehicle , but not your own . Liability coverage on most policies protects your family against unintentional damage not caused while operating a motorized vehicle . If your child falls off their bike and scratches up the neighbor 's expensive car then your homeowners/renters liability coverage should offer protection .
A stolen bike would be covered under your homeowners insurance if it is covered at all . Your auto insurance typically only provide coverage for accidents involving your vehicle . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Your comment made me laugh ! And yes , I can answer your great question like a five year old , I 'm a master of simple ! An annuity is a way of putting money aside now to spend later . You get them through insurance companies . Once you put the money in it , you should n't touch it . It sits for many years growing and waiting for you . Once you get old and need it , you tell it you are ready to get paid . It will then start paying you every month until you a. -RRB- use it up b. -RRB- pass away or c. -RRB- your surviving spouse passes away -LRB- you pick one when you get it -RRB- . They are a way of making sure you have money during your retirement . They are not a good idea for everybody - -LRB- like riding a bike without training wheels for the first ever bike ride -RRB- some people have trouble with their bills , and setting aside lots of bill money could be a bad thing , so they have to do what is called a ` suitability study ' first . It will help figure out if it is a good thing . If the person you talk to does n't do one , they are bad - run away ! And some of them are filled with hiding fees and costs , that eat away like bad bugs at your money while it is away , so you have to be careful and ask ` pacifically what the costs are in total for the annuity . If it does n't cost too much , it is a good thing . There are lots of types , so ask about all of them and take notes before you even think of giving them your money , k ? I hope that helps , please realize that is greatly simplified . But the bottom line is that the right annuity can be a great part of your retirement plan . Please feel free to contact me for more details , or to answer any lingering questions , okay ? Thank you for the ` funnest ' question I have ever gotten to answer here !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Will I Get A Refund If I Cancel My Car Insurance ?
While of the `` unearned '' premium should be returned when you cancel your car insurance , it would be important to know why you are cancelling your car insurance.If there are no other cars in your household and you are not considered an insured on another comparable auto insurance policy , you may wish to consider `` Non-owned Auto '' coverage . This type of policy covers you for liability and physical damage while you are operating a car you do not own -LRB- borrowed , rented , etc. -RRB- and may provide uninsured/underinsured coverage to you when you are a pedestrian or riding in someone else 's vehicle . Not owning a car does not mean you no longer have an auto related exposure .
You can receive a refund ONLY IF there is time left on your policy . Insureds are due back any unearned premium that insurance companies do not use . The premium is earned when then insurance company indemnifies you for the policy period . So , if you cancel your policy before the end of the policy period , then you will get back the unearned premium . The premium will be returned on a pro rata basis . For example , if you policy period is 6 months and your premium is $ 600 and you cancel after 4 months , then you will get roughly $ 200 back . I hope this helps .
If you cancel your car insurance you may be entitled to a refund , but you should discuss it with your Insurance Professional . The amount of refund will be dependent upon the amount you have paid and the length of time the policy has been in force . If , for example , you have a six month contract and have paid it in full , then if you cancel after three months you would receive about half of your money in return . Cancel after 5 months and you will receive about a month 's worth . If on the other hand you pay half and then choose not to pay your next quarterly installment , your policy 's grace period will kick in and you will continue to have coverage for a specified period of time . If you then cancel the policy while in that grace period , instead of a refund , you will owe for the extra coverage provided .
If you cancel your car insurance you may be entitled to a refund , but you should discuss it with your Insurance Professional . The amount of refund will be dependent upon the amount you have paid and the length of time the policy has been in force . If , for example , you have a six month contract and have paid it in full , then if you cancel after three months you would receive about half of your money in return . Cancel after 5 months and you will receive about a month 's worth . If on the other hand you pay half and then choose not to pay your next quarterly installment , your policy 's grace period will kick in and you will continue to have coverage for a specified period of time . If you then cancel the policy while in that grace period , instead of a refund , you will owe for the extra coverage provided .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
If you have paid your auto insurance policy beyond the cancellation date you have chosen you would get some type of refund . In most cases this refund is pro-rated , however if you were with a non standard insurance carrier or have maintained a policy with a standard insurance carrier there is a good probability the refund will be short rated . I recommend you always call your current insurance carrier to inquire about their cancellation policy .
This is a very common question and the the answer given about the technical aspects are excellent . The main thing in this type of case as I have discovered over the years is to contact a lawyer and pay for a simple interview if you must . I had a similar thing happen with an accident I had before I entered the insurance profession and I wound up paying my own deductible when the other party was issued several tickets . I did two things , I had an attorney write a letter to the company we were both insured with and I took my insurance elsewhere . I received a refund for my deductible .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Can you cancel your term life insurance ? Yes , you can cancel a term policy a couple of ways . First , simply let the insurance company know in writing that you wish to cancel . They will cancel on the date asked for or the date of receipt of the letter if no cancelation date is given . They will refund any premium unused . The second way is to let the premium lapse . Why would you do it this way ? Because it gives you a grace period to really be sure it 's what you want to do . I remember my first day in this business , there was a couple of people in the office crying in loud voices , `` but he did n't mean it '' . They were there trying to reinstate a policy that the owner had just cancelled and died like a week later . There was the letter from the insured , demanding his policy be cancelled on a certain date and it was . Unfortunately , he died a few days after .
It may be possible for a car insurance company to `` short rate '' your requested cancellation which means that they would retain a certain small percentage above and beyond what has been fully earned for the term and refund you the balance . That had been a more common practice years ago but for the most part , that does n't happen too much any more . For the most part , your policy would be cancelled as requested and the appropriate refund of any pre paid premium returned to you without any additional charge . Naturally , the amount of refund would be determined by the amount you had pre paid or the term and where you happen to be in that term .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
The simplest way to cancel any insurance is to simply stop paying the premiums . The policy will lapse and be cancelled . If you 've paid premiums in advance you may be able to get a partial refund if you write a letter formally cancelling the policy and requesting a refund of the unused portion of premiums paid . You will want to keep a copy of the dated letter and have the one you mail certified with a delivery receipt .
Car insurance policies typically do not charge a cancellation fee.If you terminate a policy , you will be given a refund based on the unused portion of your coverage . Typically , the process takes about a week . It is possible that your refund will be `` short-rated , '' which means that a small penalty may apply to the portion of the refund you are getting back . Your broker/agent can review specifics with you .
A renters insurance policy can be terminated by the insured at any time . Most carriers require a signed and dated request to be delivered in order to cancel the policy . A refund for the unearned portion of the premium would be sent to the insured . If there is a change of address following the cancellation , the cancellation request should indicate the new address for the purpose of final correspondence and the refund -LRB- if applicable -RRB- .
If in fact you have already purchased new car insurance with another company , then yes , you cartainly can request a cancellation of your previous policy . The old policy should be cancelled effective the date that your new policy went into effect . The request to cancel will be requested in writing for record purposes . YOu can talk to your new insurance professional about that . They will more han likely be able to prepare a standard form for your signature that stipulates the exact cancellation date . This will be signed by you then forwarded to your old carrier for processing . Any refund owed to you will be sent upon the processing of that cancellation .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Progressive does n't require a signed cancel request and you can access your policy right online and select cancel or call your agent . They are the Fastest when it comes to processing anything you should be able to immediately see the cancelation and if you have any refund . You also can call them direct at 1 800 progressive if you bought it online if you bought it from an agent you can call 1-800-876-5581 Bothe number should be able to assist you . They will tell you immediately if you have a refund coming or not .
You can cancel your car insurance at any time . Almost all companies will issue you a refund for any unused portion of your premium . For example , if your monthly cost was $ 100 and you canceled your policy 1 week after your last due date , you would get approximately 75 % of your money back . Please keep in mind , there may be state-specific penalties for canceling your auto insurance when you want to get another policy . Some companies in certain states may put you in the most risky driving tier because you have a gap in insurance coverage . Make sure to ask a trusted agent how this will affect your specific situation .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Has The Cheapest Term Life Insurance ?
No one single insurance company offers the cheapest term life insurance to everyone . Every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so the carrier that 's best for you may not be the best for someone else . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium that you pay for your life insurance policy - your age , the face amount of the coverage , how long it 's guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- , and the risk classification a carrier will offer you . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in evaluating which insurance company will offer you the lowest rates for a term life insurance policy.The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
You could easily determine this by getting comparative quotes from one or more agencies that handle this type of insurance . However , there is an important issue that should be considered . ` Cheapest ' is often associated with less than quality . Think in terms of a small , under-funded insurance company that could fail financially , just when your family needs the coverage . You are far better-off getting comparative quotes for the amount of insurance you desire and then choosing the strongest company in the group . Your agent can help you with this process . Do n't fall into the ` cheap pit ' . It can hurt you and your family .
The cheapest term life insurance may not be the best route to go . What you really need is the best rate for the best term life policy that meets your exact needs for your unique situation . I personally have written three different polices with three different companies on the same client to achieve the best rates for the best coverage . There are way too many variables to predict one company every time for everyone . I suggest you find a trusted experienced independent broker to shop the market for you . Their expertise is free of charge to you as a consumer .
The cheapest term insurance policy is one that accomplishes your desires . You are buying peace of mind in troubling times . Setting the appropriate limit is the most important part of the process . A trusted agent can guide you . If you die and your family discovers you could have saved $ 300 do you think that they will refuse the death benefit ? Good advice is worth a great deal .
If you go to a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes from multiple companies , you can enter some factors -LRB- date of birth , gender , term length , face amount , etc -RRB- and see which life insurance companies have the lowest quotes . If there were no questions about build or health , you are most likely viewing quotes for the best rate class , which may not be the class you qualify for . But that exercise does give you an idea of which companies offer the cheapest rates for term insurance for those in perfect health . Keep in mind that being overweight , having a health condition , or being older will probably result in other companies offering the cheapest rates . To find the lowest priced term life insurance rates for you , it is best to call an agent so that they can gather all these variables and do the shopping for you .
I 'm assuming that you want to know what company offers the least expensive Term life insurance policies in general . Most likely that would be an insurance provider that specializes in Term insurance and does n't do a lot of expensive advertising . Personally as a broker I only work with companies that are A + rated or better by the 4 independent rating agencies , and among those I 've found that Genworth , Banner , and Transamerica usually come in with the lowest rates . However the specific circumstances of the insured will have a bearing on the premiums . Gender , age and health , as well as the length of the term and the face amount of the policy each have a good deal of impact on the premium . My question to you , or rather my advise would be to get with a qualified Insurance Adviser and find out how a term policy may benefit you with your particular needs , and if Term may NOT be what you should be looking at implementing . Term insurance is the cheapest of the different types of life insurance to be sure . But is Cheap what you want or need , or is it rather Value that will benefit you the most ?
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
The cheapest life insurance is usually annually renewable term , followed by 10 year term . Annually renewable term goes up in price every year , and 10 year term goes up in price every 10 years . Some companies carry 5 year term , but there are so few choices that 10 year term rates often beat the rates of 5 year term . Whether that type of short term policy is best for you depends on your need for the life insurance . E.g. . If you are purchasing it to pay for your funeral , you run the very real risk of being unable to afford the policy by the time you die . In that case , buying permanent insurance is usually a better choice , even if it starts out costing more . However , if you only need your policy for a few years , getting a short term policy is most likely your best and cheapest choice .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
The easiest way to think of Whole life is it is the most expensive short term policy you can buy , but at the same time it is the cheapest long term policy you can purchase . Whole life will be the most costly initially per face amount than either term or universal life . Over time , whole life becomes the cheapest policy to own and the safest to own over a long period of time . With Whole life costs tend to be set contractually , while term and ul policies tend to have rising costs over time that can make them unmanageable if held for a long period of time . So the way to look at whole life is it starts high in cost but becomes low in cost over time . This is why most advisors suggest term insurance for short term needs -LRB- less than 20-30 years -RRB- and whole life for longer periods -LRB- 20 years to life -RRB- as they are most cost effective used for those needs .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
If you have excellent health , you will get the cheapest term life insurance by using a company who prides themselves on having the best `` preferred '' rates . If you have poor health , your best rate may not be term at all , as not many companies offer term life insurance to those with poor health . I use the above examples to show how there is no one life insurance company that offers the cheapest rates for everyone . Contacting a broker will help you find the most affordable rate for you .
Which is cheaper term or whole life ? How long do you want the policy ? The easiest way to think abut it is term is the cheapest for the short term and whole life is the cheapest for the long term . Depending on how you establish your dividend payouts you can even create a whole life that is the most expensive the day you buy it and there after gets a lower premium year by year . Term in reverse
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Part A Cover Prescription Drugs ?
No , Medicare Part A does not cover prescription drugs unless they are part of inpatient treatment in a hospital or skilled nursing care facility . A limited number of outpatient prescription drugs are covered by Medicare Part B , and most prescribed drugs are covered by Medicare Part D . A Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- also includes prescription drug coverage .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
It ultimately depends on what prescription drug plan you have . Not all drug plans are the same . The list of covered drugs -LRB- also known as a formulary for Medicare programs -RRB- will tell you whether your Cialis prescription will be covered . If it 's listed as a covered drug , then you would only pay your share of the expense -LRB- deductible , copay , and/or coinsurance , etc. -RRB- . If it 's not a covered drug , then you would be responsible for 100 % of the cost . It may simply be that the prescription drug plan you have does not cover this specific drug . \ At age 71 , I 'm assuming you 're on Medicare . If so , regardless of whether your drug coverage is under a Medicare Advantage plan or through a stand-alone Part D plan , you would not be able to make any changes to your drug coverage until the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15 - December 7 of each year -RRB- . During the annual enrollment period , you can evaluate your options to see which carrier 's plan will cover this prescription . If you 're covered under an employer plan , options may be limited , but if more than one option is available , I would recommend reviewing each of them to see which plan will be most suitable for your needs . If it 's an individual poilcy , I recommend contacting the agent who placed the covered for you -LRB- that person would be the servicing agent for the program -RRB- or call your insurance carrier directly to find out if it should be a covered drug under your plan . If you have a group policy , then you would need to either contact the carrier directly or your human resources department should be able to put you in contact with the appropriate person . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
No , Medicare Part A does not cover prescription drugs unless they are part of inpatient treatment in a hospital or skilled nursing care facility . A limited number of outpatient prescription drugs are covered by Medicare Part B , and most prescribed drugs are covered by Medicare Part D . A Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- also includes prescription drug coverage .
Enrollment in a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- Part D / PDP -RRB- is not mandatory . However , if you do not enroll in a Medicare approved Prescription Drug Plan , youll still need creditable prescription drug coverage to avoid a late enrollment penalty if you decide to enroll later on . To avoid the late enrollment penalty : Join a Medicare drug plan when you are first eligible and before your initial enrollment period is over . Dont allow 63 days or more in a row without a Medicare drug plan or other creditable prescription drug coverage . If you choose to delay getting a PDP plan , you are not penalized until you decide to enroll . This does come as a surprise to some people who choose to wait to buy a Medicare PDP plan after being on Medicare for some time . To calculate a late enrollment penalty fee , first determine how many months you went without creditable drug coverage . For example 43 months at a rate of $ 31.17 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- is 43 X .3117 = $ 13.40 . So , in addition to the monthly PDP premium , you would pay a $ 13.40 late enrollment penalty . You may have to pay this penalty for as long as you have a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . In addition , the penalty rate may increase each year . This was a great question . I hope this answer was helpful .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
`` Original '' Medicare will cover SOME medications under Part B . As a general rule , infusion therapy , immunizations administered in your doctor 's office and most diabetic supplies -LRB- including insulin -RRB- may be covered under Part B. Most prescriptions filled on an outpatient basis by mail order or at a retail pharmacy are covered under Medicare Part D. Your Part D prescription drug plan is a separate benefit offered by private insurance carriers . The premium you pay will vary by zip code and the covered medications . Many Part D plans have an annual deductible that must be satisfied before brand name prescriptions are included with copay 's . Be sure to verify that the medications you take are included in your Part D drug formulary You can compare drug formulary 's at Medicare.gov by using the drug formulary prescription plan finder .
In short , Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- pay for approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . The deductible for Part A in 2014 is $ 1,216 - $ 147 deductible for Part B . You are responsible for the other 20 % of your health care expenses . You can cover all or some of these expenses by securing a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- or a Medicare advantage plan . You MUST keep paying your premiums for your Original Medicare coverage under either scenario . Please note , Original Medicare does not cover prescription drugs . If you want to add prescription drug coverage , you 'll need to secure either a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drug coverage -LRB- MAPD plan -RRB- or a separate stand-alone part D prescription plan .
Typically , inhalers -LRB- and the drugs administered by inhalers -RRB- are covered under Medicare Part D and not original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- . A nebulizer used at home may be covered under Part B as durable medical equipment , however , traditional inhalers and other inhalation type drugs would be covered under Part D . If you 're under original Medicare -LRB- and have/don ' t have a Medicare Supplement plan -RRB- and would like to have coverage for your inhalers -LRB- and the drugs administered by them -RRB- , you should secure a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan to have them covered . If you 're on Medicare Advantage instead , check to see if your plan includes prescription drug coverage as it may cover the inhalers as well . Please note , whichever type of health plan structure you have , drug coverage will have a shared cost involved . Be sure to check with your carrier to see how the inhalers will be covered and how much . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Medicare Part D is the Medicare coverage designed specifically to cover the prescription drug needs of Medicare enrollees . There are a wide variety of Medicare Part D policies available from different insurance carriers and their costs , benefit structures , participating pharmacies and prescription formularies -LRB- the list of approved prescription drugs that they cover -RRB- do vary so you will want to shop around . Medicare Advantage plans , which are Medicare managed care plans , generally combine prescription drug coverage with their total package of benefits and so enrolling in a Medicare Advantage plan and taking out Medicare Part D coverage are mutually exclusive propositions .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Some Medigap Plans sold in the past did cover prescription drugs ; however , Medigap Policies sold after January 1 , 2006 are not allowed to include coverage for prescription drugs . Medigap Plans fill in the `` gaps '' that original Medicare does not cover . So it will pay for approved Medicare items . With that said , Medicare only covers a limited amount of drugs . Examples include : injections recieved in the doctor 's office , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , some types of drugs used with various durable medical equipment -LRB- ex : nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- , and under extremely limited circumstances , certain drugs you receive in a outpatient hospital setting . Some drugs in a hospital setting are known as `` self-administered drugs '' -LRB- drugs you normally take on your own -RRB- . These are not covered by Part B and , therefore , not paid for by your Medigap Plan .
Humira is a prescription medication and would not be covered by Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- nor your Medicare supplement plan F . It would be covered by a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan if it is listed in the plan 's formulary -LRB- list of drugs covered by the plan -RRB- . If your current plan does n't cover the prescription , you can change to a different Part D plan -LRB- one that covers the drug -RRB- during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Generally speaking , a Medigap policy will not cover prescription drugs . However , certain prescribed drugs covered under Medicare part B qualify for coverage under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs require enrollment into a part D prescription drug plan . I recommend locating a licensed agent specializing in Medicare/prescription drug plans to find the prescription plan the best suits your needs ...
Medicare prescription drug coverage is not mandatory , but it is very wise to have a plan if you 're on Medicare . Please note , if you do not get prescription drug coverage when you are first eligible for Medicare , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you decide to purchase it in the future instead -LRB- the penalty can be waived in certain instances such as if you are coming off of group coverage -RRB- . A great , very popular Medicare coverage structure to have is original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- , a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- to cover the all or a portion of the gaps in original Medicare - 20 % of your health expenses -RRB- , and a standalone Part D plan to cover prescription drugs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare supplement program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B does not cover prescriptions . Medicare Part A & B only covers about up to 80 % of the total costs of healthcare related charges . You can get a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover the co-insurance , deductibles and other expenses that Part A & B does not cover . In addition , you can get a Part D prescription drug plan to cover your prescriptions .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Life Insurance Work If I Die ?
When you die , the life insurance benefit is paid to your beneficiary in a lump sum , or in installments . You can talk that over with your beneficiary now and decide which is best , or your beneficiary can wait to see what method of receiving the death benefit is most cost effective at the time of death . The proceeds are generally income tax exempt and can be spent however your beneficiary wishes .
If you are the insured of an in force policy and die , the policy beneficiaries will receive the death benefit proceeds about 30 to 60 days after your demise . Generally , when a policy insured dies , the policy beneficiaries -LRB- sometimes the policy owner -RRB- contact the life insurance company and receive the carriers death claim form . That form is filled out and returned with the certificate of death and the newspaper obituary . Again , it can take between 30 and 60 days to receive the policy proceeds .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
Joint Universal Life Insurance is a universal life insurance policy that covers two people . It can be a `` first to die '' or `` second to die '' policy . If a first to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to the survivor when the first of the two persons passes away . If a second to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to a third party when both of the insured persons have passed . This latter type of joint coverage is also called survivorship life insurance . Some reasons people may purchase joint universal insurance are : 1 -RRB- They want to consolidate the number of policies they have . 2 -RRB- One of the insured persons may be uninsurable under a regular policy , but can be covered by a second to die policy . 3 -RRB- Only the survivor needs the coverage ... after the second person passes away there is no need for life insurance ... thus a first to die policy works well for them .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an experienced life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a term insurance policy may be more suitable to the need than a permanent policy . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Once you 've figured out how much coverage you want and how long you need it for , you then need to find the carrier 's program that is going to offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . This is where the risk classification comes in . This is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also want to make sure of the type of coverage you have - full coverage or Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- . With full coverage , the proceeds are paid out whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under an AD&D policy , the policy only pays out if you die by a specified circumstance -LRB- e.g. a car crash -RRB- - if you die by illness and you have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit . This is important because people see the price of an AD&D policy and it looks very attractive because it 's cheap . That 's because you 're more likely to die by illness than you are of an injury . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
By really work , I assume you mean does it pay a death claim when you die ? Yes . It does . There are many different kinds of life insurance . It 's not a lottery ticket . Term policies pay out if you die within a certain term and the coverage is in force . You can renew them but at a MUCH higher rate . Whole-Life costs more initially but is designed to always be in force .
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Do you need life insurance in retirement ? The answer is an individual one . For me personally , I do . Why ? because at some point I am going to die and somebody is going to have to take care of what I leave behind . I personally ca n't leave those people having to figure out how to pay for my service with which thing to liquidate in what ever market at the time . I do n't want them to lose salary in dealing with my death . If they need time to grieve , I do n't want them to do so at a loss . Just a few reasons I choose to carry life insurance till the dayI die .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Accidental Life Insurance policies are more of a lottery ticket than real life insurance . They will ONLY pay a claim if you die as the result of an accident . And MOST people do NOT die of accidents . A heart attack is not an accident . The policy wo n't pay for that . If you have a real NEED for life insurance , you need it regardless of how you die . Do n't buy foolish things like accidental policies unless you are only considering it in addition to your real life insurance .
The cheapest life insurance policy is the one that you already own . The cheapest life insurance policy you can buy is one that is scheduled to expire the day after you die . The fact is that the cheapest life insurance policy is always the one that is in force on the day that you die . If that is your concern work with a good life insurance agent . The agent can match your needs with a policy that will fit into your budget . Remember that when you save money on the premium and the policy expires before you die ; it is your loved ones that pay the price .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Who To Buy Renters Insurance From ?
Buy an insurance policy from an agent that you trust . Ask your friends , neighbors and colleagues for recommendation . Listen carefully to the recommendations of the agent . Makes sure the agent records the information that you provide and then transmits that to the company . Make sure that the policy is exactly what you ordered . Although the initial premium is important the acid test will be the limits of the policy when a claim arises . You can skimp on coverage now and wake up with a terribly headache when you experience a major claim .
Great question ! Almost all major insurance companies offer some form of renters insurance , so there are plenty of policies to choose from . I 'd recommend that you find an independent agent to help you find the best policy for you . A tip ? Ask for `` replacement value '' versus `` actual cost '' when you look . You will appreciate the difference if you ever need to file a claim . Anything else that I can help you with , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
All insurance is based upon the concept of shared risk . You should buy a renters policy if you can not afford the cost of replacing everything that you own . You should buy a renters policy if you can not afford the cost of a lawsuit from personal injury or property damage . You should buy a renters policy if it is required by your landlord .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters Insurance can be purchased Online ! Renters Insurance is designed to protect tenants from financial loss due to damage or theft of Personal Property and protection from cases of Personal Liability . In order to obtain a quick and free quote for renters insurance , you will need to state the amount of personal property coverage you desire , the personal liability limit and the deductible for the policy . If shopping for the cheapest possible premium , you should request the minimum amount of personal contents coverage that is acceptable to you , the lowest limit of personal liability -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- and the highest available deductible . Once you have the rate quote , you can proceed with the purchase of your renters insurance policy . The link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Renter 's Insurance is not required by state law , but many landlords will require that you carry renter 's insurance as part of your lease agreement . This is because Renter 's Insurance comes with liability insurance protection , so , in some cases , if you damage the premises , they can collect from your Renter 's Insurance policy . That coverage usually applies for accidentally created fires -LRB- for example -RRB- . Fortunately , most people can buy Renter 's insurance for about $ 10 - $ 12 per month -LRB- it might be less and some basic policies only cost about $ 5.00 / month -RRB- . Send me an email and I can get you a rate !
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A landlord can not make you buy anything you do not want to buy , but they require that you purchase renters insurancewithin the agreement or lease that you signif you want to rent the property that they have to rent . Renters insurance is typically a very low cost insurance and if you combine your auto insurance and renters insurance with one carrier the discount on the auto may almost pay for the renters .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Owns New York Life Insurance ?
New York Life Insurance is a highly rated mutual life insurance company that is owned by their policy holders . During a period of demutualization , New York life considered moving to a stock company and would have been obligated to their shareholders . Their blue chip balance sheet is a leading example of financial strength and claims paying ability among carriers as well as to their policy holders .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
Yes . Each state has it 's own department of insurance and sets it 's own requirements or compliances for all policies sold inside their particular state . Some states may look almost identical to other states requirement wise . Others like New York for example have very NY state specific rules that often require insurance companies setting up companies inside NY state . You might find ABC Insurance Carrier doing business in 49 states an ABC Insurance of New York doing business there . The state that I work in also is considered a pretty restrictive state for insurance companies . Restrictive is n't necessarily a bad thing . The idea is done with consumer protection in mind . For my state , it means new plan approval is much slower than other states , but the flip side of that is if a problem with a plan occurs , it usually has n't hit the `` streets '' in my state yet , so the consumers avoided a problem that way .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
The state of New York is one of the most highly regulated states in the country . Residents of New York general pay more for coverage . It 's critical in securing the best possible price tag by going online to a brokerage firm that has an extension inventory of New York approved careers to secure the best deal .
AARP does not offer any life insurance - they are only a marketing organization . They associate themselves with certain insurers and allow the carriers to attach their name to a product . For example , life insurance is typically done through New York Life while Medicare Supplement insurance is typically done through United Healthcare . One of my family members who is an AARP member gets letters in the mail frequently for life insurance with the AARP name -LRB- insurance through New York Life -RRB- . However , the coverage is age-banded and only carries the policy through age 80 - the coverage then terminates if they live beyond age 80 with no option to extend the program . Age-banded coverage means the rates change every 5 years as you enter into the next age bracket . They may have other life insurance products available with their name on attached , but that 's what constantly comes in the mail . If you 're looking for term life insurance , I would highly highly highly suggest consulting with an independent agent who can compare multiple carriers for you and discuss your medical history to determine the risk classification each carrier may consider you for -LRB- the risk class directly determines the premiums -RRB- . Shopping before applying is vital ! And there 's no cost to using an independent agent vs. going through a carrier directly . I would n't just buy on name as there are numerous carriers that offer term insurance who offer competitive rates . You can end up spending extra money that you do n't need to when you do that -LRB- that 's not to say a big name carrier would n't in fact be the best cost option , you just want to be sure you 're not overpaying -RRB- . The risk class is key to figure out first and then look at the rates for a given coverage amount/term length from there . If you do n't know what risk class you would likely fall under for a carrier , then a quote is nothing more than a guesstimate . Term life insurance is very straightforward . If you die during the life of the policy , the carrier pays out the death benefit proceeds . If you outlive the term premium guarantee period and and do n't want to pay the annual renewable term rates -LRB- which go up each year as you get older -RRB- , then you would likely either replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy or not have any coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To get Medicare in New York , you must be age 65 and have paid into Social Security taxes for at least 10 years . There are others who can get Medicare under age 65 , including those who have been receiving Social Security Disability for 2 years , or those who have ERD or ALS . To get more detail about eligibility for Medicare in New York and to show you how to sign up for it , go to www.medicare.gov .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
With most life insurance policies the lowest monthly premium they will offer is around $ 15 . The company that is braded as AARP life insurance is actually New York Life . New York Life is a highly rated life insurance company . Many of the life insurance certificates sold by New Your Life will allow for future rate increases so the initial rate MAY only be temporary with that particular company .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does The Letter On My Medicare Card Mean ?
The letter on your Medicare card signifies the category that is qualifying you to receive Social Security benefits . The letters are a code to let Medicare know if you qualified for your benefits based on your own work history and taxes , whether you are eligible due to Medicare because you were disabled , or a number of other reasons .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
Your Medicare number is on your Medicare card . For most people it is their Social Security number followed by a letter . The letter A means you are a wage earner . The letter B means you are the spouse of a wage earner and you are 62 or older . In some cases your Medicare number will be your spouses SSN .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
The letters at the end of your Medicare number are used as designations that describe how you qualified for Medicare . The letter A means you were a Social Security wage earner . The letter W means you are a widower of an eligible spouse , W1 a widower . Letter M is someone who is covered under Part A only .
The letter on your Medicare card signifies the category that is qualifying you to receive Social Security benefits . The letters are a code to let Medicare know if you qualified for your benefits based on your own work history and taxes , whether you are eligible due to Medicare because you were disabled , or a number of other reasons .
The Health Insurance Claim Number -LRB- HICN -RRB- is your ID number for Medicare claims . If you have your red , white and blue medicare card , it is the number -LRB- and letters -RRB- with your name . It is a combination of a number representing the primary person responsible for the Medicare insurance -LRB- often the social security number -RRB- followed by one or two letters or numbers to represent the relationship to the primary person .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
The letter D is part of some claim numbers . A plain letter D means `` Aged Widow , age 60 or over '' . D1 means `` Aged Widower , age 60 or over '' . D2 means `` Aged widow , second claimant '' . D3 means `` Aged Widower , second claimant '' . D6 means `` Surviving Divorced Wife , age 60 or over '' .
The letters at the end of your Medicare card indicate your beneficiary status . Most will have either and A or a B at the end of their number . If you have an A at the end you were a primary wage earner , a B , you are the spouse of a wage earner . A T at the end means you are not receiving SS benefits
Medicare Benefits are started automatically the first day of the month you turn 65 if you are already getting benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . Youll get your red , white and blue Medicare card in the mail 3 months before your 65th birthday . If youre not getting Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board and youre close to 65 , youll need to sign up . You can contact Social Security 3 months before you turn 65 , the month of your 65 birthday and 3 months after the month you turn 65 . Generally you wont pay a premium for Part A ; Part B will be deducted out of your Social Security Benefits and is based on your income . If you are still covered by your employers insurance you can decline your Part B coverage and save yourself that cost and apply later when your employer coverage ends . Once you have Medicare there are 2 main ways to get your Medicare coverage , there is Original Medicare or Medicare Advantage Plans . To keep thing simple if you chose Original Medicare you must buy a Part D Prescription Drug Coverage and you may also want to purchase Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . One thing to remember is that all Medigap policys with the same letter are identical in coverage the only difference is the price they charge you so shop around with a broker that represents multiple companies . If you chose Medicare Advantage its very similar to employer insurance where you have to see doctors that accept the insurance and there are small co-pays . Most Advantage plans include Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- and have low and sometimes no monthly premiums .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Medicare numbers in most cases are your Social Security number plus a letter at the end . In some cases your Medicare number may be the Social Security number of your spouse . The letters at the end of your number designate your `` status '' as a Medicare beneficiary . A `` B '' at the end means you are retired . `` B1 '' means you are the spouse of a retired worker .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
You can laminate your Medicare card ; there is no ruling against doing so . The Social Security Administration advises against laminating your Social Security card because of security features built into the card . But the Medicare card does not have these features , so your Medicare card can be laminated . Some feel that it interferes with scanning , but there is usually no problem with scanning a laminated card .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Does A Claim Affect Car Insurance ?
It depends on the amount of the claim , the type of claim , and your driving record . A minor glass claim generally will not have a big impact . An at fault accident with bodily injury could have a larger effect , especially if alcohol is involved . There is no way to answer this question definitively .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
Nowadays , car color does not have an affect on the cost of auto insurance . The things that will affect the amount you will spend are age of driver , residence location , driving history , insurance history , type of car , age of car , and cost of car . This is a very generalized list I gave you , and there are many other factors that go into the cost , but these are the most basic ones . I hope this helps you to better understand how the cost of auto insurance is formulated . Thanks for asking !
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
Most renters policies will cover a lost or stolen Iphone . However , after factoring in the deductible for your renters insurance and how an additional claim may affect your insurance rates , it may not be worthwhile to make that claim . Speak with your agent or broker to find out how this claim will affect you .
A claim can affect the renewal pricing of an auto policy . However , the claim does not always trigger a change in premium . The decision to increase the premium is based upon the cost to the company for the claim . This is not an attempt to recoup what was paid out . Rather it is recognition that this car may be more susceptible to claims than a standard car , so there are points assigned to the car that translate into higher premiums for a few years .
No , basal cell carcinoma does not have much of an effect on life insurance premiums , if any . Squamous cell carcinoma does affect rates more , depending on the stage , how long ago it was removed , and whether there was any recurrence or multiple spots . Melanoma , of course , has the most significant impact on life insurance rates of cancer affecting the skin , and may cause a decline if past stage 1 occurred within the past year .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Depression can affect life insurance rates very little , or it can affect them a lot . The severity of the depression , whether or not there were suicidal thoughts or attempt -LRB- s -RRB- , whether there was hospitalization for depression -LRB- and if so , how often and how long ago -RRB- , if the applicant is on disability for depression , how many medications are being used to treat the depression , and whether therapy is part of the treatment can all affect the rates . Mild depression treated with only one medication can result in preferred rates . A long history of depression that is resistant to treatment and has a high risk of suicide can result in a decline . In my experience , severe depression is far less common than mild depression , and most policies involving depression get rated favorably .
There are not any guarentees that a claim will or will not affect you auto insurance rates . The carrier is the one that sets their procedures that determine how a claim will affect your rates . Please contact your local agent or your carrier to discuss the effect that a claim may have on your rates .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Depending on the claim , one claim should not affect your premium . A history of a lot of small claims or a large liability claim may affect your premium depending on the circumstances . Each company looks at things differently so it is hard to give a definitive answer to your question .
Diabetes does affect life insurance rates , but how much diabetes affects life insurance depends on the level of diabetic control . More than whether you are type 1 or type 2 , whether you use oral med or use insulin , whether you were diagnosed at age 10 or diagnosed at age 50 , your A1C number matters . If it is over 10 , the amount of life insurance you can get will be limited and the price will be very high . If under 8 , a person with diabetes can get affordable rates , even though higher than someone who has no health issues whatsoever .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
It 's very difficult to say what you should be paying for life insurance because it depends on a number of factors and we all have our own needs and budgets . There 's many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs . The risk class is the MOST critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of items including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is the type of policy you 're looking to secure - how much coverage do you want/need and for how long do you want/need it guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced broker to see what programs are available and what structure would be most suitable to best serve your needs . We have in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you through the entire process of securing life insurance from figuring out how much coverage you need and how long to placing the coverage in force and beyond . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are various factors that are included when an insurance company files pricing with a state 's Insurance Department . The obvious factors have to do with a driver 's record of accidents and infractions . Many companies have also determined that one 's credit standing can be a measurable factor when calculating the rate one would pay for car insurance . The car itself has a great deal to do with a policy 's pricing with regard to both Comprehensive and Collision , but Liability as well . Think of the kind of damage that can be caused by a large sized SUV vs a sub compact car . Finally , the coverage chosen directly affects the amount you pay . If two people live next to each other , own the very same make and model car , have a clean record and are insured by the same company , neighbor A is paying less because he is only carrying the state minimum requirement for liability coverage , while neighbor B is paying more because he has chosen the more complete protection offered by higher liabillity coverage limits . These are just a few examples of factors that affect the price you pay .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Auto Insurance Is Required In Iowa ?
You are required to hold minimum limits of 20/40/15 . This is bodily injury of $ 20,000 per person maximum with a $ 40,000 accident maximum coverage . The 15 is $ 15,000 in property damage caused in any one accident . These are the absolute MINIMUM limits and should not be taken as being enough coverage for your situation . Talk to an agent to determine how much coverage may be right for you . You may also purchase a bond assigned to the state and avoid the premium on auto insurance . Often times , auto insurance is cheaper than the annual bond premium . Trevor Toft State Bank Agency 7122754512
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Iowa , especially since federal subsidies will become available through the Iowa Health Exchange in 2014 . Open Enrollment begins in October of this year . `` Bronze '' plans will be the cheapest , since they have the highest out of pocket expense . If you qualify for the maximum subsidy , your premium may be much lower than you expected . As experienced brokers , we provide free online information and quotes that allow you to shop for the best health insurance prices in Iowa . Individual , family and business plans are available . Keep in mind that your age and place of residence will impact the price you pay . f you have any pre-existing conditions , the Exchange plans will provide coverage without asking medical-related questions .
To get online life insurance in Iowa , start by going to a website that offers it , input your information , and see what premiums run for different face amounts and term lengths . If you are not sure if that website carries coverage for Iowa , you can use an instant quote engine to see if one comes up when you put in your state . Once you have your quotes , you may be called by that agency , or you can go ahead and call them to firm up your quote . Even though you may do the rest of the process digitally , by fax , or email , it is a good idea to visit personally with a knowledgeable agent so that you do not waste time applying for a policy that you are not qualified to get . A good Case Manager will also help a lot by contacting you throughout the underwriting process , to let you know how things are going . In the end , you will wind up with a policy in Iowa without ever having to leave your home .
Yes , the state of Iowa requires that you have auto insurance . The minimum required coverage is liability of $ 20,000 per incident with a $ 40,000 maximum and $ 15,000 in personal property coverage .
The cheapest health insurance rates in Iowa will be typically offered by one of the approved carriers on the Marketplace , which was created because of recent legislation . Coventry Health Care and CoOportunity Health will feature individual plans to individuals and families through the Exchange -LRB- Marketplace -RRB- and expect statewide coverage . Other participating companies will be Avera , Gunderson , Sanford and Health Alliance Midwest . So how do you apply for a policy or compare prices ? An experienced broker -LRB- along with their website -RRB- can shop for the best rates , show you the best options and discuss your federal subsidy that could potentially reduce your premium quite a bit . As a broker for more than 30 years , our focus is to help consumers navigate the healthcare waters -LRB- in Iowa or other states -RRB- so they can find the cheapest plans , but also understand what they are purchasing .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Aviva Life & Annuity Company has a New York and Iowa Company . The Iowa Company is 1.67 billion in assets with a total surplus & Asset Valuation Reserve of 85.3 million . Aviva Life & Annuity Company is rated by A.M. Best A - -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Standard & Poors A - -LRB- 7 -RRB- and Comdex 62 .
The price of Long Term Care Insurance in Iowa varies widely depending on the features of the policy , the age and health of the person taking it out , and the amount of coverage based on local costs . Long term care costs in Iowa run approx $ 75,000 per year for nursing home care . The long term care federal tax deduction limits are noted on this page , which tell you the premiums that can be deducted as a medical expense . WEBSITELINK
If you have been shopping for life insurance in Iowa and found the prices to be steeper than you expected , it may be because of the following : 1 -RRB- you are over age 40 , 2 -RRB- you are looking for permanent or a long term policy , 3 -RRB- you have a health condition , or 4 -RRB- you use tobacco . The rates that people hear advertised are usually for a younger person with excellent health and with the rate locked in for only 10 years . In 10 years , that person may be in the same situation you are . So you might just want to lock your premium in for as long as you can , because it will probably never be lower than it is today . That is true not just in Iowa , but all over the United States . If the need arises , it will have seemed like a bargain .
Renters insurance in Iowa is a tremendous value for the coverage you get . While policies from different insurance companies vary slightly , the basic coverages are very similar . The primary coverage pays for damage/loss to your personal property and pays for injury or damage you cause to others or their property . To start , you need to add up the cost to replace all of your personal property -LRB- clothes , furniture , wall hangings , books , CDs , personal records , etc. -RRB- and that is the amount of insurance you need to purchase . In most cases , the personal property items are covered while inside your rented unit and while with you away , however there may be some limitations to coverage while away from your unit . You 'll have to look at specific policies to know that . Liability coverage is very important because it pays if you are found to have injured or damaged other people or property , unless that injury or damage was caused by a motor vehicle , in which case your auto policy handles it . Liability coverage under the Renters policy protects you if someone gets hurt in/on your rented property , but also from damage you cause while out and about . A common example is you hit someone with an errant tee shot while playing golf . One thing to remember is that you want to make sure you get your personal property covered for replacement cost . If you do n't you wo n't get much for property that is over a couple years old .
In Iowa you have two options . You may purchase liability insurance with a state minimum set at 20/40/15 or you may verify your assets and purchase a guarantee bond and register it with the state . Most people see insurance premiums as much cheaper than paying liability out of pocket in an incident . Talk with your local independent agent or send me an email and we can discuss your options further .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
That 's a great question ! Peoples Life was purchased by Monumental Insurance Company . They are a subsidiary of Transamerica . The company is located in Cedar Rapids , Iowa and have been in business since 1858 . They are a good company , and one I use frequently . If you would like contact information , or details , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
If you are in need of information on homeowner 's insurance in Iowa , give me a call or send me an email . Many companies offer the similar coverage as many of their contracts are written off the same template . There are some variations in coverage and coverage options which may apply to your personal situation . Trevor Toft State Bank Agency 7122754512 sbagency@schallertel.net
Having disability insurance is a good idea in Iowa or in any other of the 49 states in the United States . Sometimes it will be provided by your employer . If not , then it is up to you to buy a Disability Insurance policy for yourself . If money is tight , getting a Long Term Disability policy is recommended , as it is more unlikely that you can financially survive an extended period without a job , as you would be able to endure a short term disability . If you can afford it , you can purchase both Long and Short Term Disability Insurance .
To answer your question , you do not `` need '' to purchase disability insurance in Iowa . However , it may be something you want to purchase . statistics -LRB- we all hate them -RRB- show a person is more likely to have an accident outside of the workplace where work comp does not apply . Many employers have reduced expenses through cutting benefits and no longer offer disability . Check with your employer before looking for you own place if it is something you desire .
Looking at car insurance rates by state , the 2014 model shows North Carolina as the 6th most competitively priced state for auto insurance premiums . Put another way , North Carolina was 46th out of 51 for most expensive auto rates . The North Carolina Auto Insurance Premium was $ 1060 which was based off of the average of all 855 vehicles surveyed in the study . The only states cheaper were Iowa , Idaho , New Hampshire , Maine and Ohio .
Pretty much every US life insurer does business in the state of Iowa . Cheapest will depend on your medical circumstances . You can find an agent who can match your medical background against carriers to pick the best one , or you can search for various life insurance health analyzers online to try and determine which carrier will work best for you before speaking with an agent .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do I Contact Medicare As A Provider ?
For specific billing questions , questions about claims , or your patience 's medical history , Medical providers can contact Medicare in a number of different ways : Online at www.MyMedicare.com ; By phone , calling 1-800-MEDICARE , or TTY1-877-486-2048 ; or by mail , sentto the following address : Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 7500 Security Boulevard Baltimore , Maryland 21244-1850
`` Excess Charges '' only occur with Part B coverage . Whether or not a Medicare Beneficiary may be subjected to Part B Excess Charges by a provider depends entirely on how the provider is contracted with Medicare . When the provider choose their method of contracting with Medicare they must choose whether they will be `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' . This terminology may be confusing but it really is not . `` Participating '' simply means the provider will accept the Medicare assignment of the Medicare approved amount as payment as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered . `` Non-Participating '' means the provider has chosen to not necessarily accept the Medicare approved amount as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered and may choose to charge the beneficiary up to 15 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- in addition to the beneficiary 's cost sharing amount -RRB- . The provider may choose on a case-by-case basis whether to seek excess charges from the beneficiary . This rule applies ONLY to physician fee schedules thus applies only to Medicare Part B charges . So it depends entirely upon whether the provider has chosen to contract as a `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' provider with Medicare . If you are in doubt it may be beneficial to contact the office manager at your provider 's office and ask whether the provider is `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' as it applies to Medicare approved payments . All the best . Mark
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , Medicare will provide coverage for a kidney transplant . Please note , how Medicare pays and how long the coverage will be for can vary based on a number of factors such as if you 're under 65 and on Medicare due to End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- , if you 're 65 or older and already on Medicare , etc. . There 's a guidebook on Medicare 's website that provides the specific coverage guidelines for each situation regarding kidney treatments called `` Medicare Coverage of Kidney Dialysis & Kidney Transplant Services '' . The link to the page is below : WEBSITELINK You should have both Medicare Part A & Part B in force and I would highly , highly recommend having a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in coverage Part A & Part B do n't cover . In short , your Part A & Part B coverage only covers about 80 % of the expenses . That other 20 % can become a very high dollar amount after all is said and done . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
If you 're enrolled in Medicare , you should have a red , white , and blue Medicare ID card that will cite whether you have Medicare Part A and/or Medicare Part B -LRB- as well as the effective dates for those coverage -RRB- . If you 're not sure where the ID card is or if you have even enrolled in Medicare , you can always contact Medicare directly to find out the information . If you purchased a Medigap plan and/or a standalone Part D prescription drug plan -LRB- PDP -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- , or Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug plan -LRB- MAPD -RRB- , but are unsure what plan you have or need information regarding the plan 's benefits , you would need to contact the agent you purchased the plan -LRB- s -RRB- through or contact the carrier directly for the input . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Aflac Long Term Care Insurance ?
Aflac is not long term care insurance . Aflac stands for American Family Life Assurance of Columbus , and the company sells a number of types of policies to groups and individuals . They do not carry a specific long term care insurance policy , although a few of their policies cover conditions that can lead to the need for long term care .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Aflac is not long term care insurance . Aflac stands for American Family Life Assurance of Columbus , and the company sells a number of types of policies to groups and individuals . They do not carry a specific long term care insurance policy , although a few of their policies cover conditions that can lead to the need for long term care .
I will assume that your daughter is covered as a dependent under your AFLAC policy . AFLAC is not major medical health insurance , it is a supplement to major medical insurance designed to pay directly to the policyholder as opposed to a health care provider . AFLAC 's policies are designed to deal with specific types of situations such as a critical illness -LRB- which they spell out specifically what conditions qualify as a critical illness -RRB- , cancer , short term disability , hospital indemnity plans , accidents and life insurance . Other than the slight chance of a short term disability policy coming into play or some aspects of a hospital indemnity policy if your daughter was covered and met the contract terms for being hospitalized and/or disabled , I do not believe there will be circumstances where an AFLAC policy would pay out for a person diagnosed with Scoliosis .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
No , Aflac does not offer a traditional Long Term Care Life Insurance product at this time . Aflac does carry a Critical Care and Recovery Insurance policy that would pay a cash benefit to the insured person if they were diagnosed with some serious , life impacting illnesses or health conditions as specified by the policy .
If you are an employee at a business that has offered Aflac to its employees through a section 125 cafeteria plan -LRB- a tax-advantaged funding method that allows a person to fund their premiums with a portion of their earnings before they obtain `` constructive reception '' of the money , thus lowering their adjusted gross income and avoiding FICA and FUTA taxes -RRB- . You are able to obtain short term disability with adjustable `` elimination periods '' -LRB- how long you wait before you start to get your disability payments -RRB- and payment periods -LRB- how long you get your short term disability for -RRB- . With Aflac STD you can even return to work and continue 100 % of your STD payments as long as you are making less then 80 % of what you were previously making . How much you recieve will depend on your earnings , due to the principal of unjust enrichment you are prevented from making a profit from your disability and thus can only suppliment your normal income up to a stated percentage-generally about 70-80 % .
Aflac does not sell Long Term Care Insurance , per se . However , American Family Life Assurance Company does carry a Critical Care and Recovery Insurance policy that would pay a benefit in case of stroke , paralysis , coronary artery bypass surgery , persistent vegetative state , major human organ transplant , or coma . They also cover policies for hospitalization and cancer . Therefore , there are some options despite the absence of a traditional long term care product .
What does AFLAC ' c Cancer policy pay ? I can only give you a general idea as each policy pays out different amounts , depending on the level of coverage you purchase . With that said , AFLACs Cancer policies usually pay for : Cancer tests such as Mammographies cervical screening colonoscopies , daily hospital benefit for room and board , some cancer drugs , cancer surgical benefits , anesthesiologist , daily doctor visits while you are in the hospital , blood , plasma , radiation therapy , chemotherapy , reconstruction after surgery , daily visits to the hospital by the patients doctor , benefits for travel to a cancer center including hotel , airfare , gas for your car to get there , ambulance benefits . These are some of the main coverages , but remember that there either annual or lifetime limits as to how much AFLAC will pay , it all depends on your policy .
Unfortunately , you are not able to purchase Aflac short term disability insurance as an individual . To buy Aflac 's short term disability coverage requires that you are employed by a business that offers it , and then it is paid for by payroll deduction . You would need to contact the business you work for to get the rates for this insurance .
Disability Insurance has many versions . There is both long term and short term . Long term is greater than 12-24 months and short term fills the 1 - 2 year niche . There are also several factors that go into pricing . Age , health condition , waiting period , length of payment , coverage dollar amount and job description . In order to obtain a firm price or even a quote , you should consult an agent to walk you through the various options . With that being said , short term disability can range from $ 7 per week with an AFLAC type group policy to almost one months earnings for a full blown disability product .
To find the price of AFLAC Life Insurance , contact an American Family Life Insurance agent . The price will depend on your age , sex , health factors , amount of life insurance you are looking for , and type of policy you desire . If you want to compare the AFLAC quote with other life insurance quotes on the internet , you can visit a site with a free life insurance quote engine and input your information . Be sure to compare prices for the same product when making your decision . E.g. Do n't compare a 10 year Term quote with a 20 year Term quote ; make sure both are the same number of years and are both guaranteed not to go up in price for the same number of years .
Aflac life insurance is sold through American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus and American Family Life Assurance Company of New York , with group policies sold through Continental American Insurance Company . Aflac and its companies were rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . They have been selling good term and permanent products since 1955 .
No . AFLAC is a supplementary insurance products insurance company that offers a variety of supplementary and voluntary insurance products . One of the products in their portfolio is a disability insurance product . But , AFLAC offers other lines of coverage such as accident policies , cancer policies , critical illness policies and life insurance policies .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
No , Aflac is a life & health carrier , offering supplemental policies , that pay you not the doctor or hospital . If you have an injury for example , Aflac would pay you for sickness or injury . Auto , home owners , liability , & commercial insurance , would be considered property & causality insurance . Think of it as P&C covers your property , & any liability for causality or risk you would incur .
Aflac sells in indemnity policies . Thesepolicy ` spay cash for qualifying event . Aflac is a great thing to have inadditionto your medical coverage but is notmeantto replace it .
American Family Life Assurance Company , or AFLAC , was rated A + by AM Best in May of 2013 . That is the second highest rating given by AM Best . While many of Aflac policies are group policies , they do sell Life Insurance in individual policies .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Does Homeowners Insurance Go Up With A Pool ?
Assuming your pool is installed correctly , properly maintained with adequate safeguards in place , the presence of a pool should have little to no effect on your premium . Most policies limits on appurtenant structures -LRB- in-ground pools -RRB- or personal property -LRB- above ground pools -RRB- are more than adequate . In rare cases , when these limits must be increased , the additional premium should not be more than $ 50-100 a year . Diving boards , water slides and other accessories presenting unusual hazards may cause a problem . Some insurers simply refuse to write or renew policies with this type of exposure . In these cases , you could see a significant increase in premium coupled with more restrictive coverage . Checking with your insurance company or agent is something I would do prior to installing a pool . If you are not comfortable with the answer , get other opinions . There is no one size , fits all .
In short , the answer is yes . But it needs to be clarified whether you are asking for property damage to the pool itself or liability coverage . Both would be covered barring any specific pool exclusions , which I am not aware of any in the standard market . If someone were to get injured while swimming in the pool , yes , your homeowners policy should cover you for liability . Likewise , if you pool is damaged due to the standard homeowners causes of loss less any standard exclusions then the pool would be covered for property damage to the pool itself . Keep in mind that wear and tear would not be covered under your policy . So if your pool liner rips `` just because '' or the concrete foundation cracks , those would be considered wear and tear . Please note that many insurance carriers are very cautious when writing homeowners insurance on homes that have pools . Some do not like to write them with a pool exposure , some do not mind , so be sure to ask your agent how it might affect your current coverage and future coverage and what the premium impact might be . You also want to strongly consider higher liability limits in purchasing an umbrella or if you already have an umbrella policy then higher umbrella limits . It might cost you $ 150 for each additional $ 1 mil limit . Lastly , if you have a pool and want to make sure you are covered for the proper limits , make sure your coverage B -LRB- other structures -RRB- limit is sufficient to cover any losses to your pool and any other structures i.e. detached garages , sheds as well .
There are several reasons auto insurance goes up ... Unfortunately some of those reasons may have absolutely nothing to do with you . Remember , all insurance is is a big pool of money . Policy holders are grouped together and pay premiums into the pool . When a claim happens , money is pulled out of the pool . If too much money is pulled out , then more money has to be put in so premiums go up ... I know this is a very simplistic explanation and the realty is much more complex , but it is a fact that if a bunch of other people in your `` pool '' -LRB- your state or region -RRB- experience a lot of acidents or other losses - the rates for everyone in that `` pool '' are going up no matter if you have had an accicent , ticket or anything else . Of course , there are individual reasons why you premiums coud be going up based on your driving record , personal characteristics , etc. . Give your agent a call and they should be able to break your premium down and explain what part of an increase pertains to you specifically and what part is a rate increase by the carrier .
A swimming pool is an attractive luxury and may in many ways enhance the sales value of your home , but your insurance company factors it as a possible risk . Homes are insured based on reconstruction value and relative risk to the insuring carrier . A swimming pool can pose a threat to the carrier since there lies the possibility of danger and a personal liability . It is more likely that a child or impaired adult may become injured in or by the pool rather than your home being destroyed by fire . In most cities around the country , there is an ordinance in force requiring homeowners to have swimming pools within a fenced yard protected by a latched gate so not to invite strangers to the use of the pool without the owner 's permission and knowledge ; insurance companies all impose the condition that a swimming pool is in a fenced and gated area without public access . Even though the swimming pool poses a greater liability risk , most insurance carriers do not assess an increase in premium ; however , they will always ask if you have a diving board and/or slide . The diving board and slide pose a much greater risk than the swimming pool itself . Some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board , slide or a trampoline in the yard . For homeowners with a swimming pool , it is highly recommended to carry the highest available personal liability insurance limit ; most likely $ 500,000 , in most States , there is no deductible applicable to the liability portion of the policy and the premium is unlikely to cost more than $ 40 - $ 80 per year for the additional liability insurance coverage . If this topic is of greater concern , you may purchase a Personal Umbrella Policy which in most cases will provide an Excess Form of liability up to $ 5 Million of coverage for a separate premium .
Your homeowners insurance will more than likely go up if you have a pool on your property . Every carrier and policy are different . The factors that will affect your rate are the type of pool . Is it above ground or in ground ? How large is the pool ? Is there a locked gate and fence around the pool ? These are just a few of the factors that will possibly affect your premium . Contact your local agent to find out what effect a pool would have on your homeowners coverage .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
Everything the guys said above is spot on ... . Check to make sure you have all your discounts . Also , ask about coverage you do n't need . Most home policies have coverage for `` other structures '' . This could be a detached garage , storage building , or a car port . If you have ZERO unattached structures on your property , ask that to be zeroed out !!! It 's not a lot of savings ... yet I 've seen $ 20 - $ 200 a year saved . DO NOT try to save by reducing your liability coverage . If money is tight now , think of how bad it will be if you are raked over the coals by an ambulance chasing lawyer !! Last I want to address the my rate statement . Yes , that is the amount you are paying each month . Sadly , most customers -LRB- just shy of ALL -RRB- come to me with no real idea of how insurance works . Think of it as OUR insurance . You are in a pool with thousands of others . As people keep jumping in the pool and splashing water out , the water must be replaced . Well , its not water its money instead of water that needs to be replenished . So if your neighbor does a cannon ball of a claim , say a fire , A LOT has to be replaced . Yes , the neighbors rate radically goes up . Yet everyone in the pool is sharing the overall risk in an area . Your rate will go up dues to inflation and because the pool needs to be replenished . SOMETIMES there is just too much crud in the pool . YOU CAN look into joining a new group of insureds that are in a cleaner pool . SHOP AROUND . If you have a question , reach out ! - gravy
If you have the right type of homeowners coverage , this question would be easier to answer . The right type of homeowners coverage would cover your property , both real property -LRB- your home , garage , built in pools , etc. -RRB- and personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture , dishes , yard fixtures , things you could take with you if you moved -RRB- for damage unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation in the policy that says it doesnt . I dont think you will find a specific exclusion or limitation for a pool leak but you will find one that says damage caused by wear and tear or deterioration , or inherent vice would not be covered . So the issue would be , why did the pool leak ? If the liner simply wore out from age or there was a defect , you probably wont be covered . But if neither of these apply ; you may find coverage for the damage . Unfortunately , most people dont have the right homeowners policy . Their policies limit coverage on personal property -LRB- such as above ground pools -RRB- to specific named perils . I call these the wrong kind of homeowners policies . If you have this type of policy , you must show the insurance company the damage was caused by one of the named perils . A pool leak is not a named peril . Under that type of policy , I think you are going to be out of luck .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
Homeowners insurance really does not go up with a pool although some carriers may have a small surcharge . What you want to look at however is liability coverage . You may want to increase your liability limits since your liability exposure increases with a pool . Such as a slip and fall or worse . A pool itself will fall under your other structure coverage . I suggest to consult your agent to see if you have enough coverage . Usually the pool is less likely to suffer damages , however your pumps and filters , heater you would want to make sure are covered .
Companies have differing eligibility guidelines when it comes to pools . Most will notadd a surchargeto the liability premium for the pool -LRB- though some do -RRB- as long as the pool meets the company ` seligibility guidelines.A fence surrounding the pool that includes a self-latching gate is a must for basically all companies . Even with that , some carriers will still only write the pool if it does not have a diving board or slide . Some carriers are OK with the diving board but not the slide , and vice versa . Some have a height limitforthe board and/or slide . All this to say , it is to your advantage to have several different carriers quote the homeowners insurance once the pool is added . Your current carrier may no longer be the best option .
An in-ground pool in and of itself does n't cause an increase in Homeowners ' premium , however , it does vastly increase your liability exposure . Here in Connecticut , local building departments have very specific requirements with respect to fencing around an in ground pool and the gate mechanisms as well . Gates must be self latching for exampla , and fencing needs to be a certain height . Check with your building department about those requirements . Next talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your Homeowners ' policy and specifically about the amount of Liability protection it provides . It would be smart to increase that protection within your Homeowners ' policy and to also talk about adding the extra protection of a Personal Umbrella Liability policy to your insurance plans . These are usually available in amounts of $ 1 million and up and are very reasonably priced for the added protection and peace of mind that they provide .
Your homeowner 's insurance will cover your pool , if properly explained to a broker and correctly listed on a policy . Typically , there will be specific requirements regarding the pool . For example , I am not aware of any carrier that does not require that the pool be fenced in and securely locked and maintained . The pool should be kept in good condition and free of hazards . And of course , you should enjoy your pool and all of the neighbors that willwantto visit you ... especially in June and July !
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
Does the presence of a Swimming Pool increase Home Insurance Premium ? Swimming Pools that belong to a Single Family Residence and are gated from public entry do not pose any additional hazard to an insurance carrier ; however , it is the insured 's responsibility to disclose the fact that there is a pool . Most carriers inspect each and every dwelling and will insist that there is no public access to the pool and the area is protected by a latched gate . There may however exist an additional hazard associated with the swimming pool , the presence of a Diving Board or a Slide . Each carrier hasits own independent assessment on underwriting the risk ; there are some carriers that will notaccept a homewith the presence of a diving board orslide ; also , there are some carriers that will accept a slide only if it is an in-ground slide for example built in a rockery type area sliding into the pool . This whole topic is focused on thehazard that exists for the risk at hand . Although , a pool will not generate a higher premium , the circumstance may make the home ineligible for insurance with various carriers .
You really need to talk to one or more independent agencies in your area to get pricing quotes . Quite a few key factors are involved in determining the homeowner pricing of each dwelling . Just to provide some examples within the process , the following are some of the key -LRB- but not all -RRB- factors in the rating process : Age of dwelling & construction type Protection - Alarmed for both break-ins & fire ? How is security system monitored ? Location - How close is fire protection ? Sinkhole frequency area ? Severe storms exposure ? Specific risk factors on premises and within the dwelling - types of animals , trampolines , swimming pools , pool enclosures , safety features for pools
In most cases , just having a pool does n't necessarily affect the pricing of a Homeowners ' policy , but it does affect underwriting requirements and should get you thinking about the best way to cover for that additional exposure . Here in Connecticut , building codes for each town regulate the security measures that are required for pools . In ground for example require fencing and self latching gates . Insurance rules will undoubtedly match that so if these are not in place , coverage wo n't be offered . As for the increased liability exposure , having a pool is one of many good reasons to talk to your Insurance Professional about Person Umbrella Liability policy for added protection .
Without having a crystal ball , it 's impossible to know how much of any type of insurance you should have.Obviously , the more , the better . With Long Term Care , you buy a total pool of money and you pick the maximum amount PER DAY that will be paid from the pool of money . So again , the larger that pool is , the better . There are lots of statistics out there , but the main thing is that it must be affordable so you keep it over the long haul . A good average figure might be in the $ 200,000 range -LRB- pool of money -RRB- and $ 200/day . That amount would cover many situations including an average nursing home . However , most claims occur in YOUR home since most people want to stay in their home . So if the above is unaffordable , buy as much as you can . You may only need $ 80 for home health care . Something is always better than nothing - and this is especially true with Long Term Care .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
The perils covered under a homeowners policy are stated in the policy . The most likely damage to a pool would be earth movement . Earth movement is excluded in most homeowners policies . It is conceivable that the pool could be damaged by a covered peril . Contact your agent if you have a specific question about pool coverage .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is Military Retired Pay A Qualified Retirement Plan ?
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
No , military retirement is not a qualified plan . It does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , it does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and the money received through their retirement plan is considered wages and not pension monies . Therefore , the retirement plan offered by the military is non-qualified .
No , the Military 's retirement plan is not a qualified plan ; it is a public sector retirement plan that is not covered by ERISA . Military retirement does not offer a vesting schedule and does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , which provides security for failed pension plans .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
The following people are eligible to apply for USAA Auto insurance : Active , retired and honorably separated officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. military . Officer candidates in commissioning programs -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . Adult children whose eligible parents have or had a USAA auto or property insurance product . Widows and widowers of USAA members who have or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy . If you or your spouse served in the military , you will need to provide the following information for that person : Date of birth Social Security number USAA number Military enlistment , commissioning , retirement or separation date
The Military does offer three retirement plans . The one that you would receive is based on your DIEMS -LRB- Date of Entry Into Military Service -RRB- . They are called Final Pay , High-3 , and REDUX . Benefits are calculated based on your number of years in service , the year you will retire , basic monthly pay received , a multiplier , and cost of living factor .
A military pension is a non-qualified retirement plan . It is provided in the public sector , does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and is not under ERISA . The FAS US Military annuity payment -LRB- distribution -RRB- from form 1099 is non-qualified .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
Their recent T.V. commercials are pretty good , with the people of all ages , who state that they have a USAA policy through various military service and family connections . The first level of those who are eligible for their policies are active , retired and/or enlisted U.S. military personnel . Also eligible are Officer Candidate personnel , such as ROTC and other military service candidate programs . Additionally , the adult -LRB- 18 + age -RRB- children of parents who either had or currently have a USAA auto or home product and widows or widowers of former USAA auto and home policyholders are eligible .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Yes the military offers life insurance through -LRB- USAA -RRB- which is a good place to start being they specialize in the military . There are other companies that deal with military personnel also such as Peterson International they deal with high risk clients such as military , football players . construction workers etc. . John Cole Virtual Financial Group Recruiter / Manager Living Benefits .
That is a great question ! Regular life insurance companies will not insure anyone that is in the military , or in an area where military action is likely . Insurance companies are all about the risk of loss , and being in the military greatly increases that risk . As a result , the federal Government offers life insurance for the members of the military , so that their families can be protected also . That is what Servicemen Group Life is . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
Im not sure if there is any free coverage . If there is it is a small amount . But all members of the military are eligible for subsidized coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs . The program is called SGLI -LRB- Service-members Group Life Insurance -RRB- . It is super cheap and all members of the military should take advantage of it . It is a flat rate regardless of age/tobacco use/health . $ 400k costs $ 27/m When you retire you can convert it to the veterans group life plan . WEBSITELINK
To get USAA insurance , you must be a member of USAA . To be eligible to be a member of USAA , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from the US military . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , . 4 -RRB- You are a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Should You Save For Retirement Or Pay Off Debt ?
There is not an easy answer to this question as there are varying degrees of debt . It can become a math problem in determining the shortest distance between retiring debt while also accumulating savings for retirement . Generally speaking it is best to reduce the `` bad '' debt which is not tax-deductible and accruing high interest rates . You figure a credit card at 18 % interest is going to yield an immediate 18 % return on your investment by paying it off . However I would think twice before paying off a zero % car loan and instead use the bank 's money to fund your Roth IRA . Also , if you stop contributing to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan you may be leaving `` free money '' on the table by neglecting the employer match if there is one . Overall , if you have an overwhelming amount of debt , it is best to tackle that first , but once it becomes manageable , to fire up the retirement savings , especially in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- with an employer match .
Should you save for retirement or pay off debt ? My answer is BOTH . While paying off debt is important , waiting till your debt free may not be something you ever get to . It is important to get into the habit of setting aside some money for retirement . Time is the best investment return a person can have . If you have time , you can contribute less and let it work . Waiting till all debt is retired leaves you with a situation where you have to throw extra money into the plan to compensate for loss of time . For a lot of people , waiting to start is just a bad idea . Do both with what you have .
Debt comes in various colors . The interest on mortgage debt is a deductible item on your income taxes . Other forms of debt are not deductible . The interest rate charged on some debt is negligible while the cost of other debt can be onerous . Credit card debt comes to mind when I think of high interest rates . While I appreciate the thoughts about retiring debt before starting a retirement program , I think it would be wise to discuss this with a tax expert . Taxation can play a vital role in this decision because the contributions to a retirement program receive favored tax treatment , where plain ordinary debt doesnt . It seems to me that the key question is the extent to which the debt is exerting pressure on the family . If it is a small amount and being retired in a systematic manner , I think that starting a retirement program at the same time makes good sense . Dont forget that what a retirement program needs is time . Shifting capital into retirement early can be quite helpful .
When youre looking at the question of what comes first retirement or paying off debt , the answer is paying off debt . But everything really starts with a good self-inventory of your income and expenses and setting up a budget so you can start telling your money where to go instead of wondering where it all went . If you have never made a budget I can send you a free worksheet that outlines the different categories and roughly how much of your income should be going to each . After you have your budget in place your next step is to set up an emergency fund minimum of $ 500 to $ 1000 . Having an emergency fund can take the pressure off of lifes curve balls when they happen and it helps you stay on track with your budget . Then you should start paying down your debt , start with the smallest bills first , once one is paid off add that payment to the next smallest bill . Its like a snowball rolling downhill gaining momentum tackling bill after bill with more force . Your next step is to build your emergency fund up so that it could cover 3 to 6 months of your expenses in case of job loss or medical illness . Once thats in place then you can look at retirement planning . If you have any questions please feel free to call me .
That is a great question ! There are a couple schools of thought here , both with merit . One school will tell you to pay off debt first , and then contribute the amount that would have been paid to interest and loans to your retirement fund . The other will tell you to start funding your retirement early , so as to best utilize the power of time and compounding interest . I recommend a hybrid approach . If you have the opportunity to fund a workplace 401k with employer match , then contribute as much as you can to receive the employer match . It makes no sense to pass on that free money , and longer time at compounded interest will grow a fund faster than shorter time and larger contributions . If that is n't an option , then open a Roth account , and fund it with automatic deposits of whatever amount you can afford . At the same time , working off a detailed budget , we work at reducing the debt , and creating an emergency savings . The ` snowball ' payment method is one that I 've found to be effective in creating excitement and motivation in reducing debt . I 've found that with most clients finding the money to be able to work on those goals simultaneously is n't hard to do , once we 've scoured their spending habits and expenses . Having automated deposits to pay your savings and Roth are also big key steps - what you do n't see , you do n't miss ! I 'm certain that you will get several differing opinions and answers to your question , so I 'd ask that you really think them over , and work with the answer that feels best to you . Find an adviser that can help you get where you need to be . Thanks for asking !
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
Should you save for retirement or pay off debt ? My answer is BOTH . While paying off debt is important , waiting till your debt free may not be something you ever get to . It is important to get into the habit of setting aside some money for retirement . Time is the best investment return a person can have . If you have time , you can contribute less and let it work . Waiting till all debt is retired leaves you with a situation where you have to throw extra money into the plan to compensate for loss of time . For a lot of people , waiting to start is just a bad idea . Do both with what you have .
There is not an easy answer to this question as there are varying degrees of debt . It can become a math problem in determining the shortest distance between retiring debt while also accumulating savings for retirement . Generally speaking it is best to reduce the `` bad '' debt which is not tax-deductible and accruing high interest rates . You figure a credit card at 18 % interest is going to yield an immediate 18 % return on your investment by paying it off . However I would think twice before paying off a zero % car loan and instead use the bank 's money to fund your Roth IRA . Also , if you stop contributing to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan you may be leaving `` free money '' on the table by neglecting the employer match if there is one . Overall , if you have an overwhelming amount of debt , it is best to tackle that first , but once it becomes manageable , to fire up the retirement savings , especially in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- with an employer match .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
When youre looking at the question of what comes first retirement or paying off debt , the answer is paying off debt . But everything really starts with a good self-inventory of your income and expenses and setting up a budget so you can start telling your money where to go instead of wondering where it all went . If you have never made a budget I can send you a free worksheet that outlines the different categories and roughly how much of your income should be going to each . After you have your budget in place your next step is to set up an emergency fund minimum of $ 500 to $ 1000 . Having an emergency fund can take the pressure off of lifes curve balls when they happen and it helps you stay on track with your budget . Then you should start paying down your debt , start with the smallest bills first , once one is paid off add that payment to the next smallest bill . Its like a snowball rolling downhill gaining momentum tackling bill after bill with more force . Your next step is to build your emergency fund up so that it could cover 3 to 6 months of your expenses in case of job loss or medical illness . Once thats in place then you can look at retirement planning . If you have any questions please feel free to call me .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Life insurance does not go to the debt of the person who died , unless the life insurance proceeds go to his/her estate . If the money goes to the estate , debt collectors will collect from it . Another way life insurance might go to pay off debt incurred by the Insured , is if the beneficiary was a co-signer for the Insured 's debt -LRB- in community property states , a spouse may need to pay off the debt even if their name was not on the contract -RRB- . If not a co-signer -LRB- or not the surviving spouse in a community property state -RRB- , the beneficiary does not need to pay off the debt of the Insured , unless they want to . If it is the beneficiary who has debts and receives a life insurance death benefit , each state has their own limitations on whether or not debt collectors can come after your life insurance proceeds . This website tells about the debt collection laws from some states : WEBSITELINK
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
I usually use the acronym DIMEE as a place to start . D = Debt or short term debt . This would be paying off credit cards , car loans , or any consumer debt . I = Income or Income Replacement . You should deceide how much for how long . A good place to start is 3 to 5 years of replacing an income . You might consider longer if cost is not much different . M = Mortgage = Paying off Mortgage . You should consider paying off the Mortgage if the income earner dies . E = Education = An estimation of your children 's tuition for a good state university if you die . You should consider 4 years of costs per child E = Expense for funeral/burial : You should cover the costs of burial or cremation , funeral services , and transportation of loved ones . These are a great place to start the discussion of what amount of Life Insurance that you need .
That is a great question ! There are a couple schools of thought here , both with merit . One school will tell you to pay off debt first , and then contribute the amount that would have been paid to interest and loans to your retirement fund . The other will tell you to start funding your retirement early , so as to best utilize the power of time and compounding interest . I recommend a hybrid approach . If you have the opportunity to fund a workplace 401k with employer match , then contribute as much as you can to receive the employer match . It makes no sense to pass on that free money , and longer time at compounded interest will grow a fund faster than shorter time and larger contributions . If that is n't an option , then open a Roth account , and fund it with automatic deposits of whatever amount you can afford . At the same time , working off a detailed budget , we work at reducing the debt , and creating an emergency savings . The ` snowball ' payment method is one that I 've found to be effective in creating excitement and motivation in reducing debt . I 've found that with most clients finding the money to be able to work on those goals simultaneously is n't hard to do , once we 've scoured their spending habits and expenses . Having automated deposits to pay your savings and Roth are also big key steps - what you do n't see , you do n't miss ! I 'm certain that you will get several differing opinions and answers to your question , so I 'd ask that you really think them over , and work with the answer that feels best to you . Find an adviser that can help you get where you need to be . Thanks for asking !
Debt comes in various colors . The interest on mortgage debt is a deductible item on your income taxes . Other forms of debt are not deductible . The interest rate charged on some debt is negligible while the cost of other debt can be onerous . Credit card debt comes to mind when I think of high interest rates . While I appreciate the thoughts about retiring debt before starting a retirement program , I think it would be wise to discuss this with a tax expert . Taxation can play a vital role in this decision because the contributions to a retirement program receive favored tax treatment , where plain ordinary debt doesnt . It seems to me that the key question is the extent to which the debt is exerting pressure on the family . If it is a small amount and being retired in a systematic manner , I think that starting a retirement program at the same time makes good sense . Dont forget that what a retirement program needs is time . Shifting capital into retirement early can be quite helpful .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
Retiring debts is often the motivation for purchasing life insurance . Often a lender will require that a life insurance policy name them as a loss payee to make sure that the debt is paid should the person die . The cash value of the life insurance policy can often retire a debt . Although no longer a popular concept , using a whole life policy y to provide the protection for a mortgage results in a cash accumulation that can pay off a mortgage well in advance of its completion , saving a great deal of money .
What are the best ways for someone under 30 to start planning for retirement ? Well first get out of the planning phase and start the doing phase . Getting the habit of saving going is the best thing you can do for yourself . Time is the most important and actually cheapest thing you can invest . People say they will start saving when they pay off debt , but most people will carry some sort of debt throughout their working lives and beyond . Save and pay down debt . Getting the habit early means actually using less money . The advantage of starting early is that you can do several things over time with different risk and reward profiles . You have time to pick and use safe , moderate and high risk investments because time works in your favor . Waiting until your older actually forces you into more risk situations as you try and make up for time by choosing higher risk investments because you need a high return . Getting started young , building your safety net allows you to take some risk because you have a fall back position , not a desperation position .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance Payments Tax Deductible ?
Eligible premiums paid for tax-qualified long term care insurance can be applied toward meeting the 7.5 % floor for medical expense deductions on your federal income tax return . The amount of eligible long term care premium that can be applied to the 7.5 % floor depends on your age . The IRS publishes a table and adjusts the amount for inflation . The benefit payments from a tax-qualified long term care insurance policy are not considered taxable income to the recipient , up to a per diem limit . The per diem limit , which is adjusted annually for inflation , is $ 320 for 2013 . The preceding is for general information and planning purposes only and may not be relied upon as tax advice . You must consult with a tax adviser for more as it applies to your situation .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Similar to disability income insurance , long-term care insurance has an `` elimination period '' . This is like a `` time deductible '' during which one has to pay out-of-pocket for care costs while satisfying the elimination period . Elimination periods are chosen by the applicant and are usually 30 - , 60 - , 90 - , 180 - , or 365-days . The longer the elimination period , the lower the premium.Some carriers provide a 0-day elimination period for home care , either as part of the policy or as an extra-cost add-on rider . If a person goes on claim at home , they may receive approved claim payments -LRB- reimbursement plan -RRB- or cash -LRB- indemnity plan -RRB- as soon as they are declared eligible for payment by the carrier . The contract indicates what the insured needs to submit to the carrier in order to be approved for payment of care costs or to receive a cash payout.There are two ways an elimination period may be satisfied : - Service Days . The insured must pay for care on any given day in order to satisfy one day of the elimination period . For example , the insured has chosen a 90 day elimination period . The insured must pay for long-term care services out-of-pocket for a total of 90 days -LRB- they do not have to be consecutive -RRB- before the elimination period is satisfied . If the person is paying for home care , satisfying the elimination period could take longer than 90 consecutive days if care is not needed on any given day or days . Carriers may have different ways of calculating the fulfillment of the elimination period using the `` service days '' method . - Calendar days . The elimination period is satisfied when a majority of days during the elimination period required care and the insured paid out of pocket . In other words , the insured does not have satisfy the elimination period with days where services were paid out of pocket . Each carrier defines how the elimination period is satisfied using the calendar day method . This method is often offered as an additional cost rider.If a person goes immediately into a full-service nursing facility , the elimination period will be fulfilled as care is received . All facility care will need to be paid out-of-pocket by the insured or the insured 's family during that period of time . It wo n't matter that much which type of elimination fulfillment method is used in such a case unless the person leaves the facility before the elimination period is fully satisfied.Some carriers do not offer a calendar day method for satisfying the elimination period . Some have a choice between the two . Some carriers only have a calendar day elimination period . Once the elimination period is satisfied in full , it does not have to be satisfied again . Since the way a carrier allows for the fulfillment of the elimination period can be the difference in hundreds - if not thousands - of dollars in out-of-pocket payments , the prospect for long-term care insurance should make this a priority question before choosing a carrier . Be sure that you read the section of a specimen or sample policy on `` Payment of Claims '' so that you understand how the proposed insurance company defines `` when long-term insurance kicks in '' .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Qualified Long Term Care Insurance -LRB- TQ Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is long term care insurance that has favorable tax treatment , as determined by the federal government in 1997 . Nearly all long term care policies sold now are qualified plans . It allows your premium and nonreimbursed benefits to be counted as a medical expense on your tax return , and allows you to receive long term care benefits tax free .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
Tax qualified life insurance was established in conjunction with HIPAA in 1996 so that people who itemize could deduct long term care premiums as a medical expense on their tax returns . It also allows those who collect on their long term care insurance to receive their benefits income tax free . Tax qualified -LRB- TQ -RRB- life insurance policies have different triggers than traditional long term care insurance , which can make it harder to receive benefits . One of the triggers that was dropped was `` medical necessity '' . Therefore , a person can not get payments from their TQ LTCI policy just because a doctor wrote a letter saying they need that type of care . Also , their inability to perform at least two ADL 's must be anticipated to last at least 90 days .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Who Has The Best Retirement Plan ?
The best retirement plan belongs to the person who started to save a certain percentage with their very first pay check and have continued saving at a specified rate until today . For many that rate is the percentage of their compensation that the employer will make a matching contribution for others it is just a number that they are comfortable with . Regardless of what plan or vehicle is used , early , consistent savers are the ones who rule when it is time to retire .
The best retirement plan is based on your specific financial goals . Your first determination is whether to use a qualified or non-qualified retirement plan . The second is to establish your risk tolerance for product suitability . The last is your timeline , the period until you retirement and the length of retire based on life expectancy . Many advisers like the combination of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s and cash balance plans .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Where the best place to save for your retirement depends on your situation . As a general rule though a plan that has tax deferral is best . That will allow you to receive the full effect of compound interest or growth . In Canada plans like Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are tax deductible and provide tax deferred growth , they are designed specifically for retirement savings . The income is taxable when it is withdrawn . If you have a plan where your employer will contribute and perhaps match your contributions . It might a Registered Pension Plan or towards your RRSP , regardless that is hard to beat . Other option is a Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- where the contributions are not deductible , but have Tax Free growth and the money is not taxed on withdrawal . There is no cookie cutter plan or product that is best . I really depends on your individual objectives . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
This best type of retirement plan is one that will fund the lifestyle you want to have in retirement , weather storms and not run out before you do . The first step is to decide what retirement success means to you and then calculate what is needed to fund it . The theory behind asset allocation is to mitigate risk by using difference asset classes . In retirement planning , product allocation is using the strengths and features of different products to mitigate risk . There is no one best product . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community.If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
That is a great question ! In the technical sense , yes , 401k 's are a retirement plan . They were not originally designed to be the primary retirement vehicle though . Originally , they were designed to compliment the pension , or company retirement plan that you would receive from your employer . As time has passed , less and less companies offer pension plans , and turned to 401k 's as a way to offer a retirement option while not having the risk of paying you after you retire . They contribute a certain amount , but the risk of losses is strictly yours . As a result , many folks have seen their retirement funds disappear when the market has fared poorly . A 401k can be a valuable part of your retirement plan , but should not be the entirety of it . Please contact me , if you would like more details , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There are several steps that a retired person can take to increase their income . The first is to unretire . Retirement is overrated . Working has positive effects on a person and when the work is meaningful it can add years of enjoyment . It can certainly stretch your retirement budget . Even before you retire you can discuss this with your employer to determine if there is some way you can return to the workforce as either a consultant or contract worker . It would be best to determine which aspects of your work you enjoy and what type of projects you want to do . Enter into an agreement to work on those things that interest you . I know a teacher who shows up two periods of day to teach Physics and then gets in his car and drives home . He enjoys what he does and doesnt want to participate in the wider campus life . Sometimes it isnt possible to continue to work for your current employer . In those instances make an inventory of work in which you excel . Armed with that list contact people who need full or part-time help in your area of expertise and offer your services , or contract for your services . If you can not find an employer who needs your talents consider working for yourself . There are a variety of ways to advertise your skills and there are people looking for your talents . If you want to try something altogether new there are franchise opportunities available . These opportunities run the gamut from stores to on-line services and sales . Finding a program that suits your capabilities and temperament should be relatively easy . Some of these opportunities can become quite lucrative . I have clients who are leaving their employment long before retirement because their on-line sales business is flourishing . Obviously working provides income and it also reduces the number of years that you will depend upon your retirement savings to provide income . If you are drawing retirement income this will give you money which you can put into a Roth IRA to fund the period when you finally do stop working altogether . One of the most important things that working does is to allow you to delay receiving social security . For a long list of reasons it is usually to a retirees advantage to delay the start of benefits until they reach age 70 . The increase in benefits is substantial to the worker and to the widow it is amazing . Working provides a great deal of emotional satisfaction and a sense of freedom . Another technique to increase your retirement income is to tap into the equity of your home . Regardless of whether the mortgage is paid or not , you can take out a reverse mortgage after age 62 . A reverse mortgage will allow you to tap the equity in your home . This is a complex transaction and the only transaction that I can think of where an applicant must be counselled by a disinterested party . It is the right move for some , though and could make your retirement more comfortable . Another way to stretch your retirement dollars is to determine what you own of value that you no longer need . If what you own can be converted to cash it might help stretch your retirement income assets . Selling things on the internet is relatively inexpensive and can be quite fruitful . I advertised an accordion on the internet and was besieged with interested buyers . Estate sales demonstrate that there are things that are not being used by the retirees that are of interest to the public . Often cars are no longer being used , undeveloped land lies idle and jewelry lies unused in a safe deposit box . Another way to stretch your retirement income is to determine what services are available to seniors in your location that cost you money currently . Many places offer discounts and sometimes services can be free . Even utilities companies participate in programs to lower costs for seniors . With almost 50 % of retirees depending on Social Security for their retirement income it is very important to understand how you can stretch that income and even increase it .
end question
