start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Mandatory In Montana ?
No , life insurance is not mandatory in Montana or any of the other 49 states in the United States . Sometimes , e.g. , BA loans will require purchase of a life insurance policy to cover the loan . But there is no state or federal law requiring the people purchase life insurance .
No , life insurance is not mandatory in Montana or any of the other 49 states in the United States . Sometimes , e.g. , BA loans will require purchase of a life insurance policy to cover the loan . But there is no state or federal law requiring the people purchase life insurance .
Yes , you can be declined for a medical condition and/or adverse health history as it pertains to `` morbidity '' . Morbidity involves a reduced ability to perform mental or physical activities . Such ailments as arthritis , cognitive impairment , Alzheimer 's disease , advanced osteoporosis , lung malfunction , and blindness are all classified under morbidity . If one uses tobacco and has any morbidity issue , that usually results in a decline as well , but smoking by itself does not often result in a decline.Underwriting for long-term care insurance is getting tighter . Genworth , for instance , will soon be requiring some medical work for applicants , which may include lab tests -LRB- urine sample and blood draw -RRB- . Carriers are also moving toward gender-based premiums , with male applicant costs being lower than female applicant costs due to the fact that more women go on claim than men . This is also true for most insurance , so it 's not a new concept . Life insurance costs are higher for men than women because women live longer . Disability Insurance has had gender-based rates for quite a while . Only Montana has mandatory uni-sex rates for all insurance.Before submitting a formal application for long-term care , an applicant should be pre-screened by completing a medical questionnaire provided either by the carrier or the representing agent . Applicants should answer all answers truthfully and completely to determine medical eligibility . It is better to be told not to submit an application due to confidential prescreening than have a formal application declined .
When you move to Montana and register your car in the state then you have to switch your insurance to Montana . If your car is still registered in another state then you can keep that insurance providing it has the same limits or higher Montanan liability limits for minimum are 25,000 / 50,000 / 10,000 But If you have moved to Montana then you need to register your car in Montana you have I believe 30 days to register your car in the state once you have moved here .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
Depending on what state you live in Montana there is no rate difference for males or females . Also your driving history and prior insurance plays a role in rates , many cases the average here in Montana drops after the age of 25 no matter what sex you are . If you have had no tickets in 3 years or accidents in 5 years the rate should lower . a Reputable agent will requite your renewal to see if there is another carrier with a better rate available .
That is a very open question there are many factors when it comes to your rates in the state you are in did you know that you can go to your states insurance commissioners office website and many times they will have a list of the carriers and the average rates that are in your area ? in Montana we are the 6th highest state for rates I recommend you check out your states insurance commissioners office they are full of resources in Montana the average rate it $ 50 a month to $ 200 depending on what area of the state you live in
In Montana there are many carriers that offer this and none of them have anything to do with getting your licenses reinstated . On average with state minimum liability limits of 25/50/10 and uninsured and underinsured and med pay at 5,000 on average the rates is from 38 to 50 a month depending on your age and driving history . Each state has different guidelines . Go look at your state insurance commissioners office website and you can learn what the state you live in has to offer . Talk to a local independent they can guide you to what is best . In Montana we use to also have what was called a broadform policy but this option is no longer available . If you have your name on a title you have to insure it even if it is just parked
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
The first thing you need to do is look at your coverage . Part `` A '' is your dwelling coverage which means your home . Make sure that your home is valued correctly . Some carriers use replacement cost so you need to make sure that you are no over insured or under insured . Also make sure that they have the correct property address . I had a client come in who had a policy on a home that was very high and after looking at the papers the carrier had been insuring the wrong home for 6 years Many times a Mutual carrier will be less depending on the type of home and the area you live in . In many cases they are less because they are no affected by natural disasters from other states which can affect everyone premium . In some cases this year alone I have seen Rates double with some carriers that had many claims from other states and here in Montana the mutual companies are less because they are all Montana based only . Shop around and most important is to make sure that you are covered properly . In the even of a total loss being insured for the wrong valuecan be a HUGE problem
Life insurance is not usually mandatory or by law such as car insurance and now health insurance . The exception would be if you were ordered by a judge in a court case such as a divorce or child custody case . The other situation causing life insurance would be a contractual agreement . Some examples of a contractual life insurance agreement would be a secured loan or a business partnership agreement known as `` buy sell life insurance '' . Other than these types of special arrangements life insurance is not considered mandatory , but if someone you care about depends on you for care or finances then out of responsibility you should carry life insurance . Remember life insurance is not for you , it is for them .
Purchasing life insurance is not mandatory , unless it is stipulated in a contract you sign or a loan that you take out . Of course , the insurance company will also decide if you have an insurable interest , allowing you to purchase coverage . But in the vast majority of situations , buying life insurance is not mandatory .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
That is a great question ! The answer is one of those , `` no , but you should '' answers . Like health insurance is n't mandatory , having it is very wise , and not having it has penalties . It iskind of like that with your prescription coverage . While it is n't mandatory to have , the cost of your prescriptions without it is often prohibitive . A prescription that Medicare covers may only cost you a couple of dollars , that without the coverage would cost $ 45-50 dollars or more . On a fixed income , and looking at stretching a retirement fund , I 'd wholeheartedly recommend that you enroll in the plan . Thanks for asking !
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
Auto insurance is mandatory here in Ohio . As an Ohio broker since 1980 -LRB- Has it been that long ? -RRB- , we help consumers meet the mandatory minimum liability requirement in the most affordable way . By shopping multiple companies , consumers can view and compare the lowest rates . Also , keep in mind that it is always a good idea to consider liability limits higher than what is legally required . Although youthful rates can be a bit expensive , as you get older , rates typically reduce quite a bit . This is an ideal time to review your existing coverage . Ironically , the Ohio state minimum limits were recently increased from $ 12,500 / $ 25,000 to $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . It had been quite a while since the limits were increased .
Un insured motorist covers your medical bills if someone hits you and has no insurance there also is under insured which covers your medical bills if someone has insurance but their insurance did n't pay all of the bills because their limits are all exhausted . This coverage cost as little as 2.00 for 6 months with some carriers in Montana I would recommend the coverage it is well worth the cost .
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
Why does health insurance cost so much in CA ? Well , the most common reason for premium cost is the cost of care in the area the insurance is sold . When a policy is priced , the insurance company factors in the cost of receiving care in that area . I would imagine health care services in CA cost more than say Montana .
I am not sure what state you are in But In Montana If someone gives you permission to drive you are covered for the liability damage . If you have no insurable interest in the auto you can Not insure the care . Now if you are both living in the same house you both can be on the same policy . Check with yourstate laws . In Many states the insurance follows the car 1st then the driver so If your name is not on the title the title owner is responsible 1st your insurance would be send in the event of and accident .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does South Dakota Require Auto Insurance ?
All states require at least a minimum amount of liability coverage before you can legally drive a car . You do not have to have insurance coverage that will pay to repair or replace your own car but you do have to protect other people 's property that you might damage with your car .
Life insurance premiums are based on the age of the insured persons , their health status , gender , tobacco usage , and the type and amount of the life insurance policies they are purchasing . While a life insurance policy in South Dakota might seem expensive compared to the quotes you hear on TV for short term policies for young persons in perfect health , the rates are higher due to these other factors , and not because you live in South Dakota . To find a less expensive policy in South Dakota , contact an agency that sells a number of companies . You will be able to shop multiple options in one spot and get the most competitive price .
Life insurance is n't any more expense in South Dakota vs. any other state in the United States . The problem could simply be the type of insurance that you are looking at . Life insurance is priced based on the type of insurance , the insured 's age , and health status . There is nothing about the state of South Dakota that makes life insurance there more expensive .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
Medica started in 1975 by a group of physicians for the purpose of becoming a Physicians Health Plan . They offer coverage in Minnesota and select counties in Wisconsin , North Dakota and South Dakota . According to Medica , `` It was the first open-access health plan in the state . In 1991 , PHP merged with Share to become Medica . And in 1994 , Medica merged with HealthSpan to form Allina Health System , an integrated organization offering both health care coverage and medical services . Medica became an independent health plan in 2001 '' . In 2010 , Medica reported $ 4 Billion in revenue and that `` 90 % of fully insured premium revenue was used to pay for health care expenses '' . Medica states that over 96 % of Minnesota 's providers participate in the program and they offer a large national network of over 660,000 providers and 5,100 hospitals to it 's members . Resources : Medica.com
Whether you are in North Dakota or South Florida , the best place to buy auto insurance is from a trusted insurance agent . If you dont have a relationship with an agent get recommendations from friends , colleagues or neighbors . A good agent will listen to you , give you sound financial advice and communicate accurately with you and the company . The most important thing that the agent will do is recommend limits . Listen to the recommendations . Having adequate insurance at the time of claim is the most important thing . It is much more important than saving a few pennies .
South Dakota Home Insurance rates are heavily affected by Hail and Wind . In the last four years every major city in the state has been hit by hail storms , some of them multiple times ! The # I have been given is that if you took every dollar of property insurance premium paid in to insurance companies in 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 and 2012 the insurance companies have paid out about $ 1.40 in claims for every $ 1.00 in premium . This has lead to rate increases , tightened underwriting , and some companies have left the state -LRB- stopped selling insurance here -RRB- . As an individual , the best things you can do are : 1 . Watch your credit . Insurance rates are based somewhat on your credit information . The better credit you have the lower your rates will be . 2 . Keep a high deductible . Insurance companies want to be there for you when you have a major claim , but they want you to handle the small stuff . Many people are changing to $ 2,500 deductibles . 3 . Use impact resistant materials . The company I work for -LRB- American Family Insurance -RRB- offers a large discount for impact resistant shingles and certain steel roofs . There are other discounts for cement board siding -LRB- versus vinyl since it does n't hold up well to hail -RRB- . Send me an email if you would like a quote !
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
The North Dakota Insurance Department regulates life insurance in the state of North Dakota , through the State Insurance Code of North Dakota . They regulate free look periods , claim processing , etc. . Here is a helpful website to read a summary of some of the things that are regulated by the North Dakota life insurance code . WEBSITELINK
There are different levels of `` cost '' in becoming a licensed `` life insurance agent '' . In South Carolina you have to take the required preparatory licensing materials and then take an exam . These materials in South Carolina is like $ 140 just for the materials and then there is an additional `` test exam fee '' that has to be a `` proctored exam '' and it is approximately another $ 100 . In South Carolina once you have passed the exam and you apply for yuor license with a company of your choice there is not a `` licensing fee '' in South Carolina . Then you have continuing education costs each year . For example , if yuo are going to sell `` annuities '' you have to take LIMRA courses in `` Money Laundering '' that typically will cost you $ 150 . You have to stay current with the continuing education requirements that are set by the Deaprtment of Insurance in your State .
This is a timely question , as a federal court just upheld on 9/10/13 the exemption of a `` Medicaid Annuity '' in North Dakota that was purchased to protect $ 400,000 of assets and speed up eligibility for Medicaid benefits . The state counted the annuity as an asset to be spent down , while federal law exempted it . The State of North Dakota is reviewing the decision and their response to it . Suffice it to say , a Medicaid Annuity must be set up precisely and correctly to survive the battle to get at those funds . You will want to involve an experienced life insurance agent and an experienced lawyer in this type of transaction .
In the State of North Dakota , you are required to have a drivers license to legally drive a car alonewithout fines or penalties . However , there are a few insurance companiesthat will insure you and a vehicle if you have a permit and you own a vehicle . If you are driving the vehicle you own with a licensed driver you will be able to legally operate your vehicle and have it insured in your name .
Yes , if you bring home a paycheck , you need disability insurance in South Carolina . The State of South Carolina does not offer state disability insurance or require that employers offer it . So if you are not getting a group policy through your place of work , it is important to purchase individual disability insurance .
In South Carolina and most other states , Group Health Insurance is `` guaranteed issue '' and applicants can not be denied coverage . However , if an applicant has not had creditable coverage in the preceding 63 days , an insurer may deny coverage for pre-existing conditions for up to 6 months . Of course , in order to qualify , you must be an employee of a legal company in the state in which you seek insurance . The number of employees required to form a group may vary by state . In South Carolina , 2 employees are required to form a group .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
North Dakota is considered a No Fault State for personal Injury up to a certain limit for medical expenses . In a no-fault state , each driver 's insurance pays for his or her own injuries up to a certain limit , regardless of who was at fault for the accident . the total necessary medical expenses you incurred because of the accident must exceed $ 2,500 , -- or -- you must have suffered `` serious and permanent disfigurement or disability '' lasting more than 60 days .
The average cost of Medigap Insurance will depend on your age , what state you live in , your smoking status and which Medigap Insurance Plan you have . Medigap Plans can range between $ 75 per month to $ 500 per month depending on those factors . The average cost of Medigap Insurance will be different in different states . For example , Texas , South Carolina , North Carolina and Colorado are usually less expensive than South Florida . However , North Florida will generally be less expensive than South Florida . Work with an independent agent to shop the market for you and find you the best plan for the least amount of premium that matches your specific needs . For more information you can visit our website or give me a call . I would be happy to answer any questions for you .
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
In addition to getting Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B in South Carolina , residents need to consider what type of Medicare Supplement Plan will be best for them . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . Some things to consider ... do you want the freedom to see any doctor you wish , without the need for a referral and benefits that do n't change from year to year ? A Medicare Supplement does all of these things and more . For more information about Medicare and to compare Medicare Supplement plans in South Carolina you can visit our website .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Difference Between Term Life And Universal Life Insurance ?
Term life will pay a death benefit to those that you love if you die within a specified period of time . A universal life policy is a permanent life insurance policy in that it can be used to provide coverage until the day of death whether that is soon or many years from now . The term policy is pure expense . The universal life policy , while more expensive now , can actually reduce the cost of protection over many years by accumulating cash values . Discuss this with your agent .
The main difference between Term Life and any form of permanent Life , Universal included , is that Term is pure Life Insurance without any frills . What I mean by that is that , so long as it is in force , it pays the stated amount as a death benefit to your named beneficiary when you die . Permanent plans include other features such as some form of inside cash accumulation that Term Insurance does not .
Some differences between Term and Universal Life are : 1 -RRB- Term rates are locked in for a set number of years . Universal life rates may be locked in for life -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Term rates are based on cost of insurance . Universal Life rates are based on costs of insurance and interest rates . 3 -RRB- Term rates must be paid within at least two months of the due date , or the policy will lapse . Universal rates may possibly be paid by cash value within the policy -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Term policies do not have any cash value . Universal Life policies may have cash value -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 5 -RRB- Term policies are pretty inflexible . Universal Life policies have much more flexibility .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The difference between Term Life Insurance and Regular Life Insurance -LRB- whole or universal life -RRB- is somewhat like the difference between renting a home and owning it . When you rent you are paying to have access each month but you have no ownership and are building up no equity in the property . Term Life insurance provides a death benefit for the term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- . If you are still alive at the end of the policy 's term then the policy expires and the insurance company keeps all the insurance premiums you have paid over the term the policy was in effect -LRB- unless you pay extra for a `` return of premium '' rider on the policy -RRB- . Term Life policies do not build up any cash value . Regular/Permanent Life insurance policies , while more expensive , can build up cash value over the years that are a financial asset to the policyholder . A Regular/Permanent Life insurance policy can also be paid up , this means at some point no further premium payments are required and yet the policy remains in effect until the death of the policyholder . This is a very high level and simplified description of the difference between Term and Permanent Life Insurance . I usually recommend that people have a combination of permanent and term life insurance over the course of their lives . As each person 's situation is unique , you should seek out an experienced life insurance agent -LRB- preferably an independent agent who represents multiple life insurance companies -RRB- to help you determine what your needs are and to design the policy or policies that will best meet your needs .
Some differences between Term and Universal Life are : 1 -RRB- Term rates are locked in for a set number of years . Universal life rates may be locked in for life -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Term rates are based on cost of insurance . Universal Life rates are based on costs of insurance and interest rates . 3 -RRB- Term rates must be paid within at least two months of the due date , or the policy will lapse . Universal rates may possibly be paid by cash value within the policy -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Term policies do not have any cash value . Universal Life policies may have cash value -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 5 -RRB- Term policies are pretty inflexible . Universal Life policies have much more flexibility .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
There are several different types of life insurance available . Term Insurance , Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are the main types . Term life insurance will be the least expensive but it also offers the least flexibility in many ways . Term is just that - a definitive length of time . If you buy 10 year term and you die 10 years and one week later , it pays your beneficiaries nothing . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime with little or no cash build-up inside the policy . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life can have significant cash build-up inside the policy which can be accessed through policy loans . This can be part of your strategy on paying for college , buying something major in your life or supplementing your retirement income . The cost of life insurance is determined by the amount of coverage desired , age , gender , medical history and the results of a paramedical exam . There is no cost to you for applying or for the paramedical exam - the insurance company covers those costs for you . By way of example , a non-smoking 25 year old female in excellent health , rated Preferred Best can get $ 250,000 of 20 year term for about $ 135 per year . I recommend you contact a knowledgeable , independent life insurance agent who can explain the different types of life insurance in more detail and help determine which is most appropriate for your needs . An independent agent will be able to let you pick from dozens of insurance companies available .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Whole life and Universal Life are two types of permanent life insurance . Whole life can be participating or non-participating . Participating can receive dividends , whole life typically has guaranteed premiums and cash values . The `` investment '' is done for you and the policy does not require much if any management other than paying the premium . Universal Life is more flexible than whole life , it is an `` unbundled '' permanent insurance policy . The premium is flexible between a minimum and maximum . You can choose between various cost of insurance options such as yearly renewable term or level . You have a variety of investment options to choose from . In short you get to , and need to make decisions to manage the policy . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life Insurance is a mortality product constructed to cover temporary -LRB- term insurance -RRB- or permanent -LRB- permanent insurance -RRB- financial liabilities . Is your financial liability temporary or perpetual ? Term life insurance is generally offered in increments of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life polices can cover you to age 121 and has five policy types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . There are three major planning categories for life insurance : indemnification , income and inheritance . First , determine which planning category you need . If the planning category is indemnification and/or inheritance then determine is the need temporary or permanent ? The solution is either term or guaranteed universal life insurance . If the planning category is income , life insurance can be a supplemental retirement alternative . Here 's some product alternatives : current assumption universal life insurance with three crediting methods : interest rates , indices and separate sub account performance using the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option . For income , you may also want to look at TAMRA compliant lowest death benefit , participating whole life , with a max term rider and a paid up additions rider .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
How much coverage are you looking for ? There are many companies that offer universal life insurance , however , the products can vary substantially between carriers . The first thing you want to find out is which products are guaranteed universal life programs , meaning even if the cash value hit $ 0 , the policy will still pay a death benefit as long as you keep paying your premiums . Current assumption -LRB- non-guaranteed -RRB- universal life programs can seem great on paper and may offer a lower premium that Guaranteed Universal Life policies , but carry a lot of risk - if the cash value hits $ 0 under these programs , then the policy crashes and you 're left with no benefits . You would subsequently have to keep paying more and more into the policy at higher amounts to keep it going . There 's many factors that go into the premium calculations for life insurance to say what universal life insurance will cost - it will be different for every person due to a number of factors including their age , amount of coverage they want , how long they want the coverage for , their risk classification , and other factors . When comparing policies from each carrier , the first thing you need to understand and determine is the risk classification you qualify for because the risk class determines the premiums . Also , not every carrier is going to offer the same risk class for a given medical history - they each have different underwriting guidelines , meaning company A could offer standard to a given profile and another carrier may be able to offer preferred . You should always consult with an experienced life insurance broker BEFORE applying for ANY coverage . Brokers can shop the case for you among a number of insurance companies to see which one will work best for your program and help you structure a policy that will best serve your needs and your budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Universal life insurance is a type of permanent life insurance program that features a flexible premium structure.It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making itmuch less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value . It 's ideal foranyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value -LRB- the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy -RRB- . You can guarantee benefits for up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
Determining the right life insurance policy to purchase is a product suitability question . Life insurance has two options : term and permanent . If your financial liabilities , future obligations and charitable intent are temporary , then buy term life insurance . But if theyre permanent buy permanent life insurance . But the total amount of these items can determine your amount of coverage . Term life insurance is generally offered in five year increments like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurance can cover you to age 121 . Permanent life insurance is offered in five types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Youll need to determine your planning model for life insurance . Is it for protection , tax advantages income or next generation use ? And in addition is your risk tolerance .
No . Term insurance is exactly what its name implies , you a buying protection -LRB- some might say renting it -RRB- against the possibility of death occurring during a specified period of time . Term Life Insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance because of its defined duration and because it does not contain any cash build up provisions . Some life insurance companies `` enhance '' their term life products with an option called `` Return of Premium '' but the policyholder pays extra premium above and beyond the cost of the basic term life insurance policy for this privilege . Essentially you are loaning the insurance company your money interest free for them to invest for 10 , 20 or 30 years while simply returning the original money you paid in at the end of the policy 's term . I wo n't argue whether this is a good or a bad investment of money , many people are lousy savers so this approach would give them some money at some future date . However , if you look at the price difference between a pure term life policy and a term life policy with the same death benefit amount and the Return of Premium feature and you invested that difference in a mutual fund or the stock market over the same time frames I suspect the vast majority of people would end up with more money by going down the investment route . You should definitely discuss this with a financial planner or other impartial advisor before making the decision to purchase term life insurance with or without the return of premium option . As an insurance sales person , I definitely believe in the value of life insurance , both term and permanent . But the commissions earned are higher when we sell you a term life policy with the return of premium provision simply because the premiums are higher . If your agent does n't at least touch on these issues with you , perhaps you should visit with another life insurance agent .
end question
start question
annuities
Does The SEC Regulate Annuities ?
Tax deferred annuities have three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indexed crediting and separate sub accounts that use equity and bond and bond investments . Separate accounts in variable annuities are a registered security and fall under the jurisdiction of FINRA as well as the department of insurance in the state of issue .
Annuities are regulated by a few various entities , depending on the type of Annuity . All Annuities are regulated by the department of insurance in the state the annuity was sold . Variable Annuities , which participate directly in the stock market via managed funds , are regulated by other entities as well . Which one depends on the broker who sold you the Annuity . FINRA , State Securities Department , & the SEC all regulate registered reps/stock brokers/asset managers/etc .
Variable Annuities are regulated by multiple agencies . First , the Department of Insurance of the State the Annuity was issued in regulates them to some extent . The states Securities Regulator also regulates them . FINRA & the SEC are two other regulators who have a hand in their regulations as well , depending on the agent who sold the policy .
Annuities are products of insurance companies so they are regulated by your state insurance commissioner . In that a variable annuity deals with securities , the agent is supervised by FINRA and the individual companies are supervised by SEC and state and federal regulations . As you can see a variable product is a regulated product .
Health insurance is regulated by multiple governing bodies including , but not limited to : Department of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- in each state Securities and Exchange Commission -LRB- SEC -RRB- , assuming the carrier is a public entity The Federal Government -LRB- ACA -RRB- Other organizations such as NAHU , AHIP and others do n't regulate , but strongly influence decisions . The majority of the regulation happens at the state level causing a different set of rules and regulations depending on where the plans are created & offered .
Who are Variable Annuities Regulated by ? Primarily because variable annuities involve securities -LRB- mutual funds -RRB- they are regulated by the SEC . Oversight comes from other sources as well such as Finra and state insurance offices . An agent collects detailed information from the applicant to verify suitability of the purchase as it applies towards the applicant 's goals and risk tolerances .
That is a great question ! There are basically three types of annuities . Two are simple , and unregulated , as their performances have stated guarantees and payment amounts . They are fixed annuities , and indexed annuities . In the first , the rate of return is a clearly stated percentage . In the second , the rates of return can vary , and are tied to the performance of a market , typically the S&P 500 . Even when the market fails to perform , this type of annuity has provisions to protect your investment . The other type of annuity is the variable one . It has no such guarantees , and is considered to be a security , so it is highly regulated , and anyone selling it to you needs to be licensed by the SEC . This annuity can make or lose money for you ; it 's payments can vary , based upon its performance of the underlying investments . This is an investment that should be carefully considered before purchasing , even more so than usual . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Like all insurance products , Fixed Annuities are regulated by the State Insurance Department of the state the Annuity was sold in . This includes , Fixed Annuities , Indexed Annuities , & Immediate Annuities/Lifetime Annuities . Variable Annuities are regulated by both the State Insurance Department , as well as FINRA . Depending on the advisor who sold the Variable Annuity , the SEC might have jurisdiction instead of FINRA .
Yes . Mutual funds are a security product under the jurisdiction of the SEC . Variable annuities are also a security as well . Both products could use equities as well as bond instruments . Fixed interest rate , indexed and immediate annuities are insurance regulated generally by the department of insurance of each state .
A variable annuity has two regulatory bodies of oversight that have standalone jurisdiction for each regulator . A variable annuity is a security governed by the SEC and sold through FINRA registered representatives hold at least a series 6 and 63 license . It also has an insurance component to it as well . And to the extent that it is an insurance product is subject to the department of insurance jurisdiction .
That is a great question ! Unless you are referring to the company by that name that is here in Houston , I think you might be confusing two separate things . There are variable whole life policies , and there are variable annuities , and both are insurance products , but they are vastly different things . Both have few guarantees on performance , and can make or lose money based upon the performance of the underlying investments . Variable products are generally considered securities , and are regulated by the SEC , while normal life insurance and annuities are not . Annuities require a period of time , at which point they pay out a stream of income ; Life insurance pays when you pass away . The only other thing that I could imagine is a variable policy that is offering an income stream for the payout , as opposed to the lump sum benefit that is normally paid . I 'd have to know more about what you were looking at to be sure . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! There are several Government bodies that regulate some or all of an insurance companies dealings . The SEC watches over securities and variable annuity transactions , FINRA is a watchdog , and the States all have Departments of Insurance that monitor our activity . The States ' insurance commissioners arealso part of a national group . There are a lot of eyes on our insurance money , and where it goes . Thanks for asking !
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
Is a variable annuity a security ? Yes , a variable annuity is subject to the same rules and oversight of the SEC that a security would be . A person selling variable annuities must be securities registered and comply with all the transaction rules established by FINRA and the SEC . One other thing to think about if you 're considering a variable annuity is that the RISK in type of product is more along the lines of a stock purchase than a nonqualified product like a fixed annuity .
There are a few entities that regulate life insurance companies . The first is the federal agency Financial Services Authority or FSA which oversees all financial institutions including insurance companies . Next would be each individual states Department of Insurance who decides if a particular life insurance company is allowed to do business in their state and how they do business in their state . The last entity would be the federal Securities and Exchange Commission or SEC for publically traded companies .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
The free look period for annuities varies according to the state in which you live . Variable annuities normally have a free look period of `` at least 10 days '' , according to the SEC . The free look period for fixed annuities is the same number of days as the free look period for life insurance products , in some states . Contact the carrier through which your annuity was purchased to find out the free look period for your annuity in your state .
Equity indexed annuities are not a security -LRB- unlike variables annuities which is a security and an insurance product . -RRB- After a long dispute initiated by the SEC , indexed annuities -LRB- some prefer not to use the term equity -RRB- remain a non security and under the department of insurance for each state .
No , a fixed annuity is not a security and is not governed by the SEC . A fixed annuity guarantees that you will receive a fixed payment for a fixed period of time ... either a number of years or for the rest or your life . As such , no part of the annuity is invested in the stock market or other securities where there is the risk of loss .
The answer is yes . Combining two annuities into one can be done through an IRS Section 1035 . This is a simple process , the agent will simply fill out two 1035 transfer forms and submit it with the new application . This is all assuming your annuities are Non-qualified dollars . If you have qualified monies , you can still transfer two annuities into one . Instead of using a sec . 1035 transfer , the agent would simple use a transfer form specifying as a direct transfer .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A Rolling Target Life Insurance ?
Rolling target just refers to an agent compensation method for universal life insurance programs . It 's not a type of life insurance coverage . The commissions agents earn on their sale of a universal life product are based on the `` target premium '' of a policy because universal products feature flexible premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Rolling target just refers to an agent compensation method for universal life insurance programs . It 's not a type of life insurance coverage . The commissions agents earn on their sale of a universal life product are based on the `` target premium '' of a policy because universal products feature flexible premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
What is a target premium on a universal life insurance ? The target premium is the premium that will keep the policy in force to a given age at what is usually the current crediting rate . In other words if thing go unchanged of the life of the policy the target premium should hit the targeted goal duration wise .
All life insurance expires it is just a matter of when . Term life insurance is purchased by the expiration date . Term can be purchased by level premiums for 5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . Technically term life insurance will not expire on that date but the premiums will increase drastically in most cases ten fold and expire around age 80 or 85 . On permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance , the expiration is determined by the level of premium . On a whole life or universal life you have different levels of premium known as minimum , target and maximum . The target premium can be set for a certain age . Most common is age 95 or age 100 . There are several companies that will allow the target to be adjusted to an age range of 105 to 150 years old . Which it would be a miracle to live past age 150 , but if one did , the policy would expire .
Adjustable premium life insurance is another name for Universal Life Insurance or UL for short . UL is not whole life and it 's not term . It 's a third version . Adjustable Premium UL has a target premium that is illustrated but you have the option of paying more or less than target and can adjust the premium that you pay anytime you want to . The adjustable premium has a huge downside . There is no guarantee that your premium will be enough to carry the policy until your death . Many UL policies will terminate from lack of premium and you will lose your insurance and all the money you paid in . Even if you pay your target premium every month , your policy can -LRB- and often does -RRB- lapse when you get older . I do n't recommend UL for the average person . It has it 's place in estate planning if you are working closely with an advisor every year and you have a real understanding of how UL works . But for the average consumer that wants to set it and forget it ... It 's a time bomb policy . I would stick to either term , whole - life , or a GUL which is a UL with a secondary no lapse guarantee . If you get the GUL , do NOT adjust your premium down or you will have turned your policy into a non-guaranteed UL .
Yes , whole life insurance can pay for itself at a point if set up properly . There are 3 ways to set premiums for a whole life plan . They are minimum premium to keep it in force , target premium to have full use out of the cash value and maximum premium which keeps the policy from becoming a modified endowment contracts . So if your whole life is set at target premium , at some point you will have enough cash value to have `` paid up '' life insurance for your life span . Whole life policies can be tricky , I recommend using a trusted life insurance broker to avoid common mistakes .
yes a variable annuity can be rolled over . Its no different than rolling over any other investment vehicle . You simple must make sure its it rolled over into a IRA or approved retirement instrument . The variable annuity is usually tied to a Mutual Fund . So timing is everything but not always logical to try roll over with the price share being its highest .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is funded with before tax contributions . Income tax has not been paid on either the amount contributed to the plan , the employers contribution if any , or the gain the plan has realized . That income tax would need to be paid if the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- were rolled into a Roth IRA . The preferred method for any roll-over is a direct , trustee to trustee exchange . If you accept your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- in cash you must roll-over the amount quickly and carefully . See a licensed insurance agent to accomplish this roll-over .
Only term life insurance expires . Whole life and universal life actually endows . It depends on how the agent sets the policy up at point of application , but the premiums are based on minimum , target and maximum premiums . The illustrations will show the age that was targeted for the coverage to endow . The most common ages are 95 , 100 , 105 and 121 years old . The whole life policy will endow at the specified age which means the premiums will begin to exceed the death benefit . At this point , you can take the cash value , you can continue paying premiums to allow the cash value to grow or you can stop paying premiums and allow the money to grow and leave your beneficiary the cash as a death benefit . Whole life insurance will not just simply expire .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- rollover simply means that you are taking your funds in your current 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and moving them , rolling over , into an IRA , Individual Retirement Account . You can also transfer the your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to another 401 -LRB- k -RRB- as well if you are working for a new employer and they have a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- option . By rolling over your monies , you avoid any tax consequences as the money remains tax-deferred . There are several options for rolling these monies to an IRA . I usually recommend rolling them into an Annuity , a Fixed Indexed Annuity . The reason is to preserve the moneys you have worked so hard to get . You are guaranteed to never lose your initial balance and usually get market like gains . When you retire , if the account was set up correctly , you can get a lifetime income as well . If you are looking at options and would like more information , do not hesitate to contact your broker adviser . If you do not have one or would like a new perspective , contact me .
The target premium of a life insurance policy is the portion of the premium that is the reference point for compensation and could also be the premium to endow , to mature and sometime might relate to the guideline annual premium . The target premium is used in a variety of applications .
Depending upon the factors of your gender , age , health condition and the amount of compensation you want to cover will determine your monthly disability premium . If your purchase it as an individual the premium may be 5 % -8 % of the compensation youre attempting to cover . That benefit will generally pay around 60 % of your targeted compensation tax free , if deducted around 80 % your targeted compensation , but its taxable .
How much money can you make as a life insurance agent ? As much or as little as you can imagine . It all depends . . It depends on your work efforts , your target market , your ability to `` work '' your target market and sometimes just some luck . Over my 25 years , I 've seen agents fail and I 've seen agents earn several million dollars in a year . Probably the best words to remember were from one of those agents who did make millions . . `` Be nice to everybody , because you 'll never know who can help you . '' Words I try to live by everyday .
How do you get your 401k after leaving your job ? Usually you would contact your HR department and see what steps they may require for processing your account . What is important to the situation is what is your plan for those 401k monies . Are you going to roll them over into your new employers plan ? Are you going to roll them over into an individual IRA ? Are you going to convert them to a Roth IRA ? or are you going to take the tax hit and cash your retirement out ?
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
Yes , you can roll a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into a Variable Annuity as long as the Variable Annuity is a qualified account , an IRA . Be sure to look closely at Variable Annuities . I do n't usually recommend rolling a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into these as there is market risk meaning you can lose the money you have worked so hard for . Be sure you understand the pro 's and con 's in relation to what your goals are . Seek an adviser or contact me if you want to look at some recommendations based on what your future goals are .
I presume from your question that you must be a health care provider or supply some type of service and/or product that is reimbursable under health insurance plans . First , you need to determine the competitive environment for your product or service in your marketplace . If you have lots of competition your negotiating position will not be as strong -LRB- perhaps nonexistent -RRB- as if there is limited competition for your product or service in your marketplace . The insurance company will know the answer to this question from their perspective so you need to know the answer too before engaging in discussions with insurance carriers . Know what the absolute minimum is that you can accept as payment for your product or service . In today 's environment cost is the main driver in provider contracting , any insurance carrier is going to want the lowest possible cost from any provider/vendor they contract with . What they want to pay could well be below your cost of providing the service . You will have to make a business decision if such an arrangement would make business sense in the overall context of your total business model . What is your unique selling proposition ? What do you offer that a competitor or other product does not provide or provide as well ? Do you offer a qualitative advantage , a price advantage , or both ? They are going to ask you these questions and expect you to prove it so be prepared . Do research on the insurance carriers . Does your target market align with theirs ? If your focus is on infant care calling on an insurance carrier who is more focused on the senior marketplace is obviously a waste of everyone 's time . Even among health insurance carriers that from the outside seem to be competing for the same market segment you will find upon closer examination that they all have their areas of market strengths and weaknesses and marketplace segments they focus on . Some are more oriented towards individual and small group health insurance while others really shine in the large group space . Knowing this in advance and knowing what your capabilities are will allow you to focus on the prospective carriers best aligned with the marketplace that is also the best fit for your product or service . Once you have these basics understood you can begin contacting the various insurance carriers and ask to be put in touch with the department and/or person who handles the insurance carrier 's provider contracting and you can let the games begin .
You should plan A LOT for retirement ! Why ? Because your retirement date may be a moving target , despite what you believe . There are many variables such as social security , safety of a defined pension , the performance of your investment portfolio etc. . . Current events can often change what appeared to be set in stone . You should meet regularly with your financial adviser , make appropriate changes when and if needed , and adapt and adjust to changing market conditions . You 'll be wiser and you 'll sleep better . Do n't chase impossible rates of return . Diversify and allow full-time professionals to help you .
Yes , whole life and universal life insurance policies are considered permanent life insurance and do accumulate cash value that can be used for numerous things . The typical whole life insurance policy takes 5 to 7 years to accumulate cash as the first few years cover the cost of insurance . There are ways to maximize your premiums to build cash value if that is your goal . An experienced insurance agent can show you your options to minimum fund , target fund and maximum fund your whole life insurance policy . Your cash value can later be used to pay up your premiums , retirement funds , children college fund or even cash for a critical illness .
That is a great question ! Once you have started a retirement plan , it remains yours , whether you are with the company or not . They will no longer make contributions to it , and now you wo n't either , so it will sit there in limbo , and grow slowly . Contact your HR person , or plan administrator if you do not know which financial institution is managing the fund , so you can figure out what you want to do . You may be able to roll it into your new employer 's 401k plan , if they offer one . You may be able to roll it into a Roth IRA plan that you establish . If you consider taking the cash from it , be aware that it will be heavily taxed , and you will pay a penalty for removing the cash - plan on giving away at least a third of it , okay ? I hope that helps , contact me with questions if you have them , and thanks for asking !
end question
start question
annuities
When To Purchase Annuities ?
You should purchase an annuity when you need a lifetime stream of income . That is what only an annuity can provide . There are other times to purchase an annuity . You need to save towards retirement or some other long term goal and want the earnings of the savings to be tax deferred . An annuity is your solution . You might buy an annuity to realize a greater profit as compared with other long term savings vehicles .
Maybe never . With any savings or investment products , you need to create a financial suitability profile that establishes your risk tolerance and confirms your economic goals . If those goals include tax advantaged insurance products , then you should consider annuities . If tax deferral is a key component for you , then annuities should be a consideration . Annuities have crediting options like interest rates , indice returns and equity/bond market performance which you should correlate with your risk tolerance profile . But keep in mind that ultimate use of annuities in your portfolio should be for income . Without this critical goal in mind , annuities may not be for you .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
The annuity starting date is the date that the annuity is `` annuitized '' , or starts making payments to the beneficiary of the annuity . Immediate annuities will have a starting date right after the purchase of the annuity . Deferred annuities will have a mandatory start date years down the road , as determined by the contract established between the annuity company and the person purchasing the annuity . However , the annuity owner can choose to annuitize at any time prior to the start date , although it is best to delay until after the surrender period .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
Yes , you can have more than one annuity . This can happen sometimes when an individual will purchase an annuity and then later came into a sum of money . Rather than just leave the money sitting in a checking account , it can be used to purchase additional annuities . In other cases , you might choose a different payment schedule to help with different expenses . An individual might purchase one annuity with monthly payments to handle their every day living expenses and purchase one with annual payments to provide a larger annual payment . For example if your home is paid off , you might have a small annual annuity to provide payments for property taxes and homeowners insurance premium payment .
Annuities are always taxable when gain is withdrawn from the annuity unless the annuity is placed inside a Roth account . Annuities do defer taxes when no money is removed from the annuity , so if no withdrawal , the gain is not realized until it is withdrawn from the annuity . Annuities use the Last in Last out -LRB- LIFO -RRB- accounting rule , which means gain in the annuity must be withdrawn before basis is removed , unless the annuity is annuitized . For annuities with a cost basis -LRB- i.e. non tax deducted/qualified -RRB- annuitization uses a tax rule known as the exclusion ratio to make part of the income stream gain and part non-taxable basis .
When you select a period certain payout option for a fixed annuity , the monthly payments will cease when the selected term period expires . For example , if you selected a 20 year period certain fixed annuity , your monthly payment would stop after 20 years . You are given a number of options when you first create your annuity - one being how long you want the payments for -LRB- a specified period of time , or continue on for life -RRB- . The shorter the payout period , the higher the payment . If you want it to payout for the rest of your life , the monthly payment would be lower . It 's important to review your options with an experienced insurance broker -LRB- I would recommend one with a background in estate planning to be most beneficial -RRB- when purchasing an annuity as each company may offer a different rate so some companies may offer you a higher monthly payment than others for the same purchasing price . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your annuity program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! Annuities are considered to be life insurance products , but they have some notable differences . The first is that unlike insurance , there are no requirements as to your health to purchase one . The second is that in many cases , annuities are paid for in one lump sum , not in monthly increments . The third , and perhaps most important , is that anyone can purchase life insurance , but not everyone can buy an annuity . The reason is that there has to be a `` suitability '' for the sale - the removal of the cash to purchase the annuity can not put you into a position of financial difficulty , or it is not a `` suitable '' '' financial venture . A good insurance company would not allow , for example , a person with a net worth of $ 50,000 to purchase a $ 30,000 annuity , and probably would decline one for an even lesser amount , depending upon the person 's financial state . Please consult with an agent , to see if an annuity is something that would work well for you . Contact me , if you would like more info . Thanks for asking !
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Mudslides ?
Typically , mud-related claims are not covered on homeowner 's insurance policies , even though they cause more than $ 1 billion in losses each year . However , you can purchase Flood Insurance , which may cover mudflow damage -LRB- which is different than mudslide damage -RRB- . Your contents would also be covered . Some states will allow an `` earth movement '' rider which may cover a mudslide . It 's always best to check with an experienced broker that can quickly discuss your best options by reviewing multiple carriers in your area .
Typically , mud-related claims are not covered on homeowner 's insurance policies , even though they cause more than $ 1 billion in losses each year . However , you can purchase Flood Insurance , which may cover mudflow damage -LRB- which is different than mudslide damage -RRB- . Your contents would also be covered . Some states will allow an `` earth movement '' rider which may cover a mudslide . It 's always best to check with an experienced broker that can quickly discuss your best options by reviewing multiple carriers in your area .
Your Homeowners Insurance policy provides coverage for a wide range of perils . It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions , and any limitations included in your policy . It is safe to say that in general , there are two perils that your Homeowners Insurance wont cover namely loos due to earth movement and loss due to flood . In most cases , coverage for earth movement -LRB- sinkhole , earthquake , mudslide etc. -RRB- can be endorsed onto your policy . Flood Insurance , however , must be purchased separately .
The section of the policy that will likely answer the question the best will be found in the `` Exclusions '' . In the ISO Homeowner Form 3 -LRB- HO3 -RRB- policy , emulated by most insurers if not used directly , and the most common form of homeowner insurance issued in the USA , is the form I take this information from . It says : Collapse , Settling , subsidence , earth movement -LRB- unless endorsed otherwise -RRB- , landslide , mudslide , mudflow , sinkhole , or any other impact of the earth sinking , rising or shifting that impact the foundation structure , walls , footings or floor are specifically excluded . An exception is made for the impact of losses caused by fire but only to the extent caused by the fire . In other words , if a fire ensues and the building eventually collapses , it is covered to the extent the damage was caused due to the damage of fire . There are certainly regional exceptions . In Ohio , due to past mining activity , subsidence has to be offered in various counties -LRB- but does not need to be purchased -RRB- . Florida has a problem with sinkholes and may have state mandated coverage changes . California has issues with earthquake and almost certainly requires at least the offer of earthquake insurance . Check with your local insurance representative for the advice that fits your particular locality .
I am assuming that you are talking about a Central Air system . Homeowners Insurance provides broad coverage for damage caused by named perils , and excludes coverage for damage caused by some specific instances like earth movement and flood for example . So say there is a lightning strike that damages electrical appliances connected to your home , including your AC unit . In a situation like that , subject to your deductible , insurance will cover the cost to either repair or replace those appliances . If they are damaged by a flood or a mudslide or some other form of earth movement , then the policy would not provide coverage .
Flood is a peril that is specifically excluded under a renters policy . Flood is generally caused by inundation of rain , tidal water or mudslide . If you had a pipe burst in your unit that would likely be covered if you had an ISO form HO-4 Renters policy . Keep in mind that there are limitations on expensive items such as jewelry , money & securities , fine arts etc. .
Protection for loss as the result of flood is often overlooked . Nearly 25 % or all property claims are flood claims . Many people can not visualize a flood and yet I have seen flooding in very unusual places . When persistent rain caused mudslides in Marin California , storm drained were plugged with debris and nearby homes were flooded , even in the mountains .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Homeowners insurance does not cover the death of the owner . Homeowner 's insurance protects the homeowner from sudden losses relating to the structure itself . Life insurance covers the death of the homeowner . Benefits are paid to the policyholders designated beneficiaries . Often the homeowner is also the primary breadwinner , and that income is needed to continue making mortgage payments , and repairs to the property .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Great question ! While there are some policies that will cover a few cases of death , the vast majority will not . Many people assume that homeowners insurance covers much more than it does , so I can not stress enough the importance of understanding exactly what the policy does and does n't cover before purchasing it . There may be cases where Liability coverage may cover , but again , it is a life insurance policy that typically pays as a result of a death , very rarely your homeowners . If I can help you more with this , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Insurance companies offer homeowners ' insurance policies to people who own and occupy their residence . Once foreclosure occurs , you may occupy your residence but you no longer own it . If you are allowed to remain in the home for a period of time , you may be able to contact your insurer , explain the circumstances and have your policy amended to a Tenant Homeowner form . Tenant homeowner policies are issued to people who occupy a residence but do n't own it . The coverage is similar to homeowners ' insurance except it does n't cover the structure . It covers certain damage to your personal property , additional living expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and your have to live in temporary quarters while it is being repaired and certain personal liability exposures . You may need to adjust the amount of insurance on your personal property be consistent with what it would cost you to replace all your personal things . If you move to a rented home or apartment , you may be able to amend your homeowners ' policy to a Tenant Homeowners ' form and amend the address to that of your new residence .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Homeowner 's insurance does not cover accidental death . If a guest is injured on your property , homeowners insurance will cover $ 1,000 of medical expenses per person per incident . It will not provide any coverage per persons living in the home . If you are concerned about additional liability , an umbrella insurance policy can be purchased that provides coverage above and beyond what your normal homeowners and auto insurance policies cover .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Who Started Medicare Advantage ?
The federal government started Medicare Advantage . In 1997 , the Balanced Budget Act gave Medicare recipients the option of receiving their benefits through private health plans , called `` Medicare + Choice '' or Medicare `` Part C. '' The named changed to Medicare Advantage when the Medicare Prescription Drug , Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 added prescription drug coverage to Part C .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Humana 's Medicare Advantage product is a Medicare HMO or Medicare Managed Care plan and I would presume you are trying to compare it to Medicare Supplement policies . In general terms , most doctors are n't thrilled with Medicare regardless if it is traditional Medicare or the new Medicare Advantage products sold by insurance carriers such as Humana or United Healthcare due to the reimbursement -LRB- payment -RRB- levels set by the government . You provide no specifics so it is impossible to give you a definitive answer . Medicare Advantage products have to cover everything Medicare covers and generally offer an even broader range of benefits to their members . However , the trade off from the consumer 's perspective with Medicare Advantage plans is that you must stay within their network of health care providers for your care to be covered . From the health care provider 's perspective they are almost certainly presented with a different payment methodology under a Medicare Advantage plan than the fee-for-service approach they have been used to and they will find their practice of medicine under greater scrutiny for the quality and effectiveness of the care they deliver . In my experience these types of physician remarks usually boil down to manner of payment and control issues . You should find a licensed health insurance agent who sells both Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage plans who can explain the specifics of what each approach does and present each one 's advantages and disadvantages . Your doctor could be giving you good advice for your particular area or they could be expressing their own prejudices .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
I do n't think is a matter of `` need '' for a medicare advantage plan , but a matter of choice . Would a Medicare Advantage plan be a better choice compared to a supplement or going with just basic medicare ? It is wise to compare these options and how they will effect you . As Ted has noted , there are some advantages to Medicare Advantage plans that make them very attractive as a choice to a consumer . So , it might be better to consider a simple basic difference between Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage , Medicare `` rights '' . When you purchase a Medicare Advantage you are assigning your Medicare rights to that organization and commit to service -LRB- outside of emergency -RRB- to that organization as they become your Medicare provider . A Medicare Supplement does not restrict the insured to any one location or provider . For some people , this is a very important issue and could be the deciding factor .
For some people Medicare Advantage plans are an excellent senior health insurance solution . I believe at last count we were in the 13 to 14 million seniors participating in Medicare Advantage plans . As with most every choice in life there are tradeoffs involved . Medicare Advantage plans are essentially HMO plans for Medicare eligible seniors . They offer a broad , comprehensive range of benefits and value added services and wrap everything up in one package . The flip side to Medicare Advantage plans is that their enrollees operate within the plan ` scontracted network of providers to receive their care . This does , by necessity , impose some restrictions on their member 's choices in doctors , hospitals , pharmacies , etc. , and this environment is not for everyone . That said , changes in the American health care system , some but not all prompted by ObamaCare , are also working in ways that make it more challenging for traditional Medicare enrollees to find and/or keep health care providers that accept Medicare . So , whichever way a senior citizen decides to go they will probably be faced with some difficult choices and compromises . Medicare Advantage plans vary from one insurance carrier to another . One ca n't objectively say that Medicare Advantage plans are , as a class , a better or worse choice than traditional Medicare plans . That is a determination that each individual has to make for themselves based upon their perceptions of their present and future needs . Certainly Medicare Advantage plans are an option that a senior citizen should consider but the important thing is that people have a choice .
Just a point of clarification to the + Larry Gilmore response ... Medicare Advantage plans replace original Medicare . A Medicare Advantage plan does not `` fill the gaps in Medicare '' . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in original Medicare so any `` gaps '' in coverage are paid by you , the Advantage policyholder . Medicare Advantage plans have many moving parts including deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance . A large claim or numerous medical expenses will almost always result in much more out of pocket expenses under an Advantage plan than you will experience with original Medicare and a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
I would definitely recommend it . Medicare has no out of pocket limit . If you come down with a serious illness this can be devastating , leaving you tens of thousands in debt in some cases . If there is a good Medicare Advantage plan in your area then you may want to consider that . Especially if a Medicare Supplement is unaffordable . The advantage would be : Medicare Advantage has out of pocket maximums , usually between $ 3500 and $ 6000 . Many Medicare Advantage Plans have no additional premium other than the Medicare Part B premium you already pay . Many also include Prescription Drugs at no additional premium . Yo have networks but if your area has a strong network then that is generally not going to be an issue . You would also have copay 's , usually between $ 10 and $ 20 for a primary care doctor . This makes your health care much easier to predict since under original Medicare you pay 20 % of whatever Medicare approves but you have no idea what that will be until you get your bill . There are also many affordable Medicare Supplements . I usually recommend the supplements if you can afford the premium . Find a good local agent who specializes in Medicare plans , both supplements and Advantage plans . A good agent will help you decide which will be in your best interests with no pressure
Medicare Advantage plans are quite different from a Medicare supplement plan , also known as Medigap . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in original Medicare . Your health insurance is covered by a private insurance carrier . Medical providers file your claims with your Advantage carrier , not Medicare . Most Advantage plans have networks you are required to use if you want full coverage . Some Advantage plans provide OON -LRB- out of network -RRB- coverage but with higher deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance . HMO Advantage plans typically have no benefits when you use a non-par provider . With original Medicare you have the freedom to use any doctor , hospital or other medical provider anywhere in the country . There are no networks . Medical providers file claims with Medicare . Once Medicare adjudicates and approves the claim it is forwarded on to your Medigap carrier so they can pay their portion .
Medicare Advantage plans are technically a Medicare replacement plan . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in traditional Medicare . Rather you are enrolled in a privatized form of Medicare . Your doctor , if they participate in the Medicare Advantage plan you chose , will file claims with your Medicare Advantage plan , not with Medicare . There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . The one that meets your needs and budget is what is best for you .
This is a Medicare Advantage Plan offered by Aetna . Several companies offer Medicare Advantage Plans . Medicare Advantage Plans are compensated by Medicare to administer claims . They will pay instead of Medicare . As a result most Medicare Advantage Plans offer more benefits than Original Medicare . There is also far less out of pocket exposure . Medicare Advantage Plans , unlike Original Medicare , will have a network of doctors that you must utilize , similar to the networks under most group plans .
Medicare Advantage only replaces Medicare from the stand point of claims administration and benefits . You are still in the Medicare system and still have all the rights and protections of Medicare . The only real difference to you is that with Medicare Advantage you usually have more benefits than original Medicare and the insurance company pays the claim . Sit down with a good agent who specializes in helping older adults with their Medicare programs . Find one who is able to offer multiple insurance companies and that offers both Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplements .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
When Should I Drop Comprehensive Car Insurance ?
That is soley a personal decision . Ultimately the decision is really what can you bare as a financial loss should you be in an accident and you vehicle is damaged . As the vehicle ages it is normally worth less and less each year so if the vehicle is damage the less you will receive for the vehicle if it is considered totaled.Typically if a vehicle is over seven years old many insured will no longer collison or other than collision coverage . You have to weigh the decision of paying the extra premium for the extra coverage over the value of the vehicle .
Comprehensive coverage is not widely understood . Basically it covers damage to a vehicle that comes from something other than a collision . This includes striking an animal . The coverage is tied to the value of the car but some drop the coverage because they are putting the car in storage for a period of time . Any loss sustained would not be covered if comprehensive coverage was not maintained , whether that was a car being burned in a garage fire or vandalism .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
The single best thing you can do is shop around with other auto insurance companies . Each company is unique in that they have their own appetite for what they like and do n't like . You may fit right into some company 's `` sweet spot '' . But you will never know which companies can beat your current rates . As far as lowering premium on an active policy , you have to be careful . Normally when drivers lower their coverages or cut them out altogether , they tend to make cuts in the wrong areas . It 's important to understand the difference between a controlled risk and an uncontrolled risk . A controlled risk is one where by lowering or dropping coverage , you know the exact dollar amount of the extra risk you are taking on . This includes raising your deductibles on comprehensive and collision coverage -LRB- or dropping it altogether -RRB- , dropping additional coverage such as rental and roadside assistance/towing . Stay away from lowering uncontrolled risks ! Namely liability coverage and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverage . This is where people get burned ! Keep both of these as high as you can afford them .
When you have a loan on a vehicle , your loan contract will require you to carry coverage on the vehicle itself which is known as physical damage coverage . Physical damage comes in the form of comprehensive and collision . In general , collision is anything you collide or have an upset with and comprehensive is everything else . Basically , the lienholder wants their interest protected which is the car . When a lienholder is listed , the insurance company is obligated to let them know if this coverage is dropped . If the coverage is removed , the lienholder , contractually , has a right to obtain coverage on its own and to add the cost to the amount of your loan . Adding teen drivers to a household can be expensive since they are inexperienced behind the wheel and are statistically more likely to have an accident . Check with your agent to see if any additional discounts are available with a youthful driver . For example , many companies offer a good student discount if the teen driver averages a B or better in school .
I rarely recommend that any driver drop collision coverage . Regardless of the premium there will be a sum recovered if the car is damaged in a collision and that might be extremely important to the customer . I do advise them that as the car loses value the amount they will recover drops as well and that for some older cars a minor collision would result in the car being declared a total .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
Great question ! There would be a couple of immediate results . The first is that you would no longer have the benefit of insurance to help pay for costs should you become sick or injured . Those costs can be devastating to your financial stability . The second is that under the Affordable Care Act , there are penalties for not having insurance , that are leveled when you file your taxes for this year . The health insurance companies limit the ability to enroll in their programs , and many workplace plans will not drop you until the open enrollment period unless you meet specified conditions.Without knowing the reason that you are considering dropping your coverage , I would ask that you would have a plan in place before you actually do drop your coverage . If I can provide more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Insurance isnt a tax or merely a legal obligation . Because auto insurance follows a car you should have auto insurance any time you own a car . If you decide to register the car , most states will require insurance covering liability for the operation of the car . If you are going to store a car you should consider comprehensive auto insurance to protect your car from a wide range of perils .
Car insurance will pay for a stolen car as long as you have comprehensive coverage . Comprehensive coverage covers the vehicle for damages not resulting from a collision accident . For example , fire , theft , glass breakage , a tree falls on the car , ect . If you car is stolen the insurance company will determined the blue book value and pay out the blue book value less your deductible . Kelly Blue Book is a good site to use to determine the value of your car . If your car is still financed and there is a gap in coverage you may end up stilling owing the finance company . Gap insurance is available to cover this need .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Two of the best reasons to buy Life Insurance at an early age is to first lock in a low price , and second insure against any health issues you might have as you grow older . No reputable company will drop you for developing health issues , and that should be clearly stated in your policy . If you 've made your payments on time , you should have nothing at all to worry about . The only legal way that a company could drop you is if there was reason to doubt the truthfulness of your answers on the application when it was submitted , and your policy is less than two years old . Other than that , you should have no problem keeping your policy . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does A Salvage And Recovery Clause Mean ?
Salvage and recovery relates to subrogation and rights of recovery that an insurance company reserves for themselves after indemnifying you for a loss . The entire concept of salvage , recovery , subrogation , and indemnification fill up text books . Insurance is a contract and in the contract the insurance company has been asked by you , in exchange for mutual understandings and agreements , to provide protection against certain kinds of losses . When your insurance company indemnifies you for your loss , they replace you in position of right in many situations . For example , if your car were damaged beyond repair , the carrier pays to you the value of the car and in doing so , assumes right and title to the salvage value of your car . They sell this salvage to businesses that resell the usable parts and the insurance company uses the money they collect to lower the final dollar cost of paying your loss to you . Recovery usually relates to the right of the carrier to pursue `` recovery '' from the responsible , negligent party who damaged your car . This process is referred to as subrogating and the carrier seeks to recovery from the at-fault and negligent driver -LRB- under tort laws -RRB- all or a portion of the amounts they paid to make you whole after your loss . Another closely related provision in your insurance is the right of `` abandonment '' . Insurance companies do not grant you the right to abandon your property so you can collect a larger reimbursement . This may come up during the settlement of pairs and sets , like ear rings . The insurance company will not let you surrender -LRB- abandon -RRB- to them the other ear ring so you can make the insurance carrier liable for a larger amount so you can buy a new set of ear rings . The obligation of the carrier is to the amount of the the loss even if only a partial loss . That 's why your company will repair a car rather than pay you the full value when there is a partial loss . There are other places where salvage comes up , like in inland and ocean marine , but for the vast bulk of readers the latter answers explain how these terms impact your coverage and how your insurance company will deal with you .
When the insured receives payment of an adjusted claim , the property that is damaged becomes the property of the insurance company . Often that damaged property is of little value . However , particularly in the case of an automobile , the car may be salvaged and the insurance company may realize part or all of the adjusted claim payment . The term comes primarily from ocean marine insurance . Often a ship will have a fire in the hold . An adjuster will fly out to the ship while it is underway , evaluate the loss and the insurance company may adjust the claim before the ship even reaches port . That portion of the property that has been declared as loss becomes the property of the insurance company . There are companies that specialize in salvaged property . This is most commonly seen in the cases of ships but could apply to other forms of recovery . While I am not sure of the legal interpretation , this clause might extend to the insurance company the right to claim any gain that an insured might have on property that was declared as a total loss , and then sold to a salvage company .
When the insured receives payment of an adjusted claim , the property that is damaged becomes the property of the insurance company . Often that damaged property is of little value . However , particularly in the case of an automobile , the car may be salvaged and the insurance company may realize part or all of the adjusted claim payment . The term comes primarily from ocean marine insurance . Often a ship will have a fire in the hold . An adjuster will fly out to the ship while it is underway , evaluate the loss and the insurance company may adjust the claim before the ship even reaches port . That portion of the property that has been declared as loss becomes the property of the insurance company . There are companies that specialize in salvaged property . This is most commonly seen in the cases of ships but could apply to other forms of recovery . While I am not sure of the legal interpretation , this clause might extend to the insurance company the right to claim any gain that an insured might have on property that was declared as a total loss , and then sold to a salvage company .
Salvage and recovery relates to subrogation and rights of recovery that an insurance company reserves for themselves after indemnifying you for a loss . The entire concept of salvage , recovery , subrogation , and indemnification fill up text books . Insurance is a contract and in the contract the insurance company has been asked by you , in exchange for mutual understandings and agreements , to provide protection against certain kinds of losses . When your insurance company indemnifies you for your loss , they replace you in position of right in many situations . For example , if your car were damaged beyond repair , the carrier pays to you the value of the car and in doing so , assumes right and title to the salvage value of your car . They sell this salvage to businesses that resell the usable parts and the insurance company uses the money they collect to lower the final dollar cost of paying your loss to you . Recovery usually relates to the right of the carrier to pursue `` recovery '' from the responsible , negligent party who damaged your car . This process is referred to as subrogating and the carrier seeks to recovery from the at-fault and negligent driver -LRB- under tort laws -RRB- all or a portion of the amounts they paid to make you whole after your loss . Another closely related provision in your insurance is the right of `` abandonment '' . Insurance companies do not grant you the right to abandon your property so you can collect a larger reimbursement . This may come up during the settlement of pairs and sets , like ear rings . The insurance company will not let you surrender -LRB- abandon -RRB- to them the other ear ring so you can make the insurance carrier liable for a larger amount so you can buy a new set of ear rings . The obligation of the carrier is to the amount of the the loss even if only a partial loss . That 's why your company will repair a car rather than pay you the full value when there is a partial loss . There are other places where salvage comes up , like in inland and ocean marine , but for the vast bulk of readers the latter answers explain how these terms impact your coverage and how your insurance company will deal with you .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Yes you can get insurance on a vehicle that is a salvage title . Not all insurance carriers treat this the same way . Some do say no , others will only allow liability while some will still let you have full coverage . Contact a local independent agent who can find you the right insurance company to insure your salvage title vehicle .
I am not sure what you mean by write off your car . However if your vehicle is totaled and your insurance provider offers you a settlement you can take the money in exchange for the vehicle . Or you can buy the vehicle back and make the repairs yourself . Your vehicle going forward will be registered with the DMV as a salvage title vehicle .
That is a great question . Those are really difficult policies , and as a rule , I do n't recommend them , so I can understand why you would want out of it . There can be a whole lot of fees and opportunities to lose money on these policies . Here 's what I 'd advise you to do . Get with your agent , -LRB- or a different one in the company , or another trusted adviser -RRB- and determine whether there is any salvageable cash value . If there is , find out if it is better for you to reallocate your funds into safer sub-accounts and run the policy dry , keeping coverage as long as possible ; to withdraw the cash and let the policy lapse ; or roll it into something safer in a 1035 move . If there 's no real cash value , then dropping it will be easier . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
This has been a hot topic in California . Apparently , an insurance company can not refuse to offer comprehensive coverage on a salvage titled car . I suspect that this coverage isnt available in other states but there doesnt seem to be a provision to deny coverage in California .
As a part of the settlement of your claim , you can request to keep your car . The company will probably reduce the amount that they will pay you but you would then have the car . If the car is repaired and passes your state inspections it would be given a salvaged title . Many insurance companies will not provide comprehensive or collision coverage for a car with this impaired title , however liability insurance should be readily available .
Loss of Use for both Renters and Homeowners Insurance pays for any additional expenses incurred if you are forced to leave your home or apartment while repairs are being made . For example , you have to pay additional housing costs because of staying in a motel , you have to eat out more because you have no place to cook your food , you have to store your salvagable furniture in a storage facility . These type of things would be included under Loss of Use .
Many people `` cancel '' their policies by simply stopping paying the premium . That is not a bad way to drop a term policy , but with universal life , you should cancel your policy through the carrier . You may be able to salvage some of the cash value , or even use it to continue your policy until you can afford paying premiums again . It is not your most cost effective choice to just let UL slip away .
If your car is declared a total loss you will be offered a settlement for the value of the car minus the deductible -LRB- if you were at fault . -RRB- Frequently you will be given the option to retain ownership in the car for a negotiated amount . If you then have the car restored , the licensed car will have a salvage or C title . The settlement is negotiated between you and the insurance company . Make sure that you understand all the options and assert your position if it is necessary .
Many insurance companies will allow you to buy back a vehicle which they have declared to be a total loss . The key is to let the insurance company know immediately that you want to retain the car regardless of their decision on repairs . Once the car has been determined to be totaled it will be sent to a salvage yard and off to auction or dismantle . Once it is in that system it is difficult to retrieve the car , so let the insurance company know immediately that you want to keep the car . The insurance company will then adjust the settlement to include the value of the car in its current condition .
Great question ! Your insurance company considers your car totaled when the cost of repairing it is close to , or higher than it 's blue book or their estimated value . Once the car is considered totaled , the company will send you a check for the amount specified by your policy , and the adjuster 's estimates . The amount they have determined will be minus the amount of your deductible , and any amount that you may owe them . In most cases , the company will own the rights to the car , and will sell it for salvage , or at auction to mechanics willing to repair the vehicle . I hope that you never have to find out , but if you do , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The answer to this question depends on the laws of the state you are from . If you plan non operating -LRB- PNO -RRB- and renew car registration with PNO fee you do n't have to have insurance on it . The only requirement that insurance company may have is that your car is properly registered with DMV . For instance , if the car is salvaged and there is no title , you ca n't insure it . But if the title was issued - you can get coverage . Here is a tricky question : if you own an off road mobile equipment , for instance , the one used in construction , and this vehicle is not designed / nor used on public roads - you are not required to register -LRB- i.e. forklift -RRB- . But if you cross a highway on a public road , than this creates a legal issue . This is a known fact . In the end , to answer your question more info is required . Do n't relay on anything you read here .
Why buy private health insurance ? Well , honestly for a while longer you do n't have to if you do n't want to . The choice to insure has been a personal one in this country for some time . If you did not wish to have coverage , you did n't have to carry any . But here 's the rub to deciding not to have health insurance . If you have a medical need and the means to come close to paying the BILL that comes along with treating the need , the BILL will be treated as any other BILL a person receives in their lifetime . That is , if you decide not to pay it and you have assets or the means to pay it , the hospital or doctor will act just like any other entity out there and send you to collections for recovery . The people Hospitals and Doctors `` write off '' do not have the means to pay for a premium . They have nothing of value . So yes , they do get their care without charges . If you have the means to pay and do n't , a hospital or Doctor will not treat you the same way . Besides all insurance does is cover for risk you do not want to self insure for . You can either pay for an insurance policy or pay out of your assets , entirely for now , your choice .
Your homeowners will repair or replace your roof if damage is the result of a specified peril -LRB- i.e. fire . -RRB- Most companies limit recovery on a roof claim to the actual cash value of the roof . That means that the recovery can not exceed the depreciated value of the roof . This is because roof life is much shorter than the rest of the house .
Insurance companies rarely accept a full risk . When you buy comprehensive and collision insurance the company requires that you pay a part of the recovery when there is a claim . As the car depreciates the recovery is reduced . The sum of the deductible , the premium for the coverage , and the lessened recovery reach a point where maintaining the coverage no longer makes sense . This happens with many cars around their 10th year .
Outside of the application process , no in most cases , unless other wise specified within the policy . If a person passes from drug related issues after purchasing a policy , the company will pay ... Unless , there is a recorded history of drug use prior to the application and the applicant does not disclose this during the underwriting process . After two years this may be a moot point as the contestability clause would prevent the insurance company from refusing to pay . However , not all states have adopted this clause . The clause could be shorter or depending on the state , not applicable at all in cases of insurance fraud .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Which Is The Best Car Insurance In Florida ?
There are so many responsible carriers in Florida that write both personal and commercial insurance , that I do not believe that any should be singled-out , in my opinion . You might be well-served by contacting several independent agencies in you area and askthem to get you quotes from National and Regional carriers that they represent for auto insurance . Then check out the companies via a few internet searches .
I can address this question specifically for Florida . The Florida Department of Motor Vehicles requires that you register your car within 10 days . That 's pretty fast and a lot of people find becoming a Florida resident to be a bit stressful . It is important to know that in order to register your car you have to have Florida insurance . Handle the insurance first and take that proof of coverage with you to register . If your insurance carrier writes auto in Florida , changing the policy can be as easy as a cancel/re-write . If you 're changing carriers , be prepared to answer all the necessary questions for your household ... Driver 's License , Date of Birth , SSN and the vehicle information ... VIN number . Your use of vehicle is also important . Many new Floridians are new retirees as well . Be sure to have the policy rated correctly ... as a retired person vs someone who commutes to a job . Depending on the county in Florida , a visit in person with the agent may be necessary to verify no prior damage to the vehicle . Related to this is the need to change your Driver 's License . Depending on what state you are moving from some additional documentation to prove your identity may be required . Be sure to check this out before making the trip to the DMV .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
In Florida , the best Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- Plan will depend on your individual needs . Across the United States , Medigap Plans are standardized -LRB- plans have same benefits regardless of insurance carrier -RRB- . Not only can you use your plan benefits in Florida but anywhere in the U.S. as long as the provider accepts Medicare . Plan F is very popular because it covers all Medicare approved charges . But that does not mean it is the best plan for everyone . Plan F is the most expensive plan and Florida 's rates are among the highest in the country , and even though you can use your Medigap Plan outside of the state , you still have to buy the Plan in Florida if it 's where you reside . There are a couple other popular plans with lower premiums if you do n't mind small co-pays , co-insurance or meeting the Part B deductible . As a licensed independent agent in Florida , I can share with you the Plans that are available in your area . Since Medigap Plans are standardized , once you determine which Medicare Supplement insurance benefits you want then the next step is finding the premium that meets your budget . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Medicare Supplement Insurance in Florida is a fraction of the cost of what you would spend on medical bills over the course of your lifetime . Considering that Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs . You are on the hook for the other 20 % unless you have a Medicare Supplement . In Florida , the premiums can vary widely from North Florida to South Florida . An independent agent that specializes in Medicare Supplement Insurance will be able to show you everything that is available to you and help match the plan that fits your specific needs . Visit our website at SummitMedigap.com to compare Florida Medicare Supplement plans instantly online . We are also happy to help answer any questions you have at 1-888-407-8664 .
I do n't know what state you are in , but I can answer this as respects Florida auto claims . The insurance is on the car and a temporary driver -LRB- who has permission to drive the car - meaning that it was n't stolen -RRB- would have coverage . In Florida the minimum liability for auto damage is 10,000 . If there was insurance on the vehicle that hit your son , that policy would cover at least 10,000 in property damage to your son 's car .
Most states , and I believe Florida is included in this , require that you show proof of auto insurance issued in that state in order to register your car . So if you live elsewhere and are in Florida only part of the year , ask your Insurance Professional for a referral to a Florida agent if yours is not already licensed there .
The average cost of Medigap Insurance will depend on your age , what state you live in , your smoking status and which Medigap Insurance Plan you have . Medigap Plans can range between $ 75 per month to $ 500 per month depending on those factors . The average cost of Medigap Insurance will be different in different states . For example , Texas , South Carolina , North Carolina and Colorado are usually less expensive than South Florida . However , North Florida will generally be less expensive than South Florida . Work with an independent agent to shop the market for you and find you the best plan for the least amount of premium that matches your specific needs . For more information you can visit our website or give me a call . I would be happy to answer any questions for you .
The cost of Home Insurance is based on the losses in your area . Extreme weather works in cycles , so a specific area will have several years of very severe storm losses , causing rates to go up . When that cycle ends the losses go down and so do the rates . Of course construction costs tend to trend up , as do the values of everything else , and insurance rates have to adjust to compensate , but without rate increases , insurance companies would not be able to afford to stay in business through the bad years . A great example of this is the state of Florida . After Hurricane Andrew , insurance companies were hit very hard . When they tried to raise rates the state passed legislation limiting rate increases . So , backed into a corner , many insurance companies went broke or pulled out of Florida . Consequently , the largest insurer in Florida is now the state of Florida -LRB- the taxpayers are on the hook for claims if another significant storm hits -RRB- . After several years of no severe storms , that trend is reversing with several insurance companies coming back into the state and the # of policies the state holds is decreasing .
If you are looking for long-term care insurance in Florida , make sure you are dealing with an agent that has the proper certification . As Ms. Mace mentioned we have to be licensed to sell health insurance . In Florida , we also must take an additional class and pass the test to receive a certification to sell long-term care insurance . It is one of Florida 's ways of ensuring the customer is protected . I have my certification so if you are in North Florida please feel free to contact me : 3525145295 , cscottbannon@hotmail.com or PO Box 786 Keystone Heights FL 32656 . I would love to meet with you so we can individualize a plan of protection for you and your family . With much appreciation . To your prosperity .
There are several insurance companies in Florida that sell Medigap Plan F. Medigap Plan F , in Florida , will result in a pretty high premium compared to other states in the country . But if you do n't want to be bothered with co-insurance , co-payments or deductibles , then Plan F will meet your benefit needs . As a licensed independent agent in Florida , I can share with you the companies and Plan F rates that are available .
It really depends on the State you live in and the Company you are dealing with . In Florida , you can put your children , spouses and significant others on a Florida Blue plan . But ... if you go through the Government Subsidy , that 's a whole different story . Depending on the level of subsidy , the children may have to go on Florida Kid Care and significant others would have to go on a different policy .
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle .
Renter insurance makes a lot of sense . If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle . Yes it makes sense to buy renters insurance .
Since the rules on this can change from one state to another , check with a local agent on the rules . In Florida , if you 're buying a car with finance you have to give proof of insurance to take the vehicle off of the lot at purchase . If your car purchase is replacing one vehicle for another , a quick call to your agent prior to finalizing the deal is all that 's needed . If the car is an additional car -LRB- and additional policy -RRB- a new policy will need to be written . This can often still be done with a quick call to your agent , but plan for the expense of starting a new policy .
Medicare Advantage plans vary greatly in benefit design and price . Rates and benefits are set by geographic area . As such , Advantage plans in Florida will differ from those available in Georgia . There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . A plan purchased in Florida would no longer be valid if you moved out of the plan service area .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
The largest by a significant margin is State Farm which has more than 20 % of the market in terms of written premium . Industry figures from 2012 indicate a total of $ 15 billion in premium . -LRB- That 's not property values - That 's premium ! -RRB- The next closest is Allstate at about 10 % of the market . The next eight carriers of the top ten , each having no more than 3 % or so of the market , are : Farmers ; Liberty Mutual ; USAA , Travelers ; Nationwide ; Chubb ; Citizens and American Family . Here in Florida , if you can be insured with any of these carriers , with the exception of Citizens , you have a strong National company behind you , in the event of losses . Many of them do not write in Florida , especially if coverage for the peril of wind is included .
Medigap Plans will vary in cost depending on your age , smoking status and the state that you live in . It will also depend on which Plan you go with . Some plans can range between $ 100 - $ 200 per month in states like South Carolina , North Carolina , Colorado , Texas , Michigan and Georgia . However , premiums in Southern Florida are generally higher than in other areas of Florida . The amount of co-insurance , deductibles and co-pays you can save by having a Medigap Plan makes it a very easy decision to make . You can get more information on our website about what the different Medigap Plans would cost . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can I Have Multiple Home Insurance Policies ?
You can have multiple homes and a separate policy for each home ; or , you can have one home and a separate policy covering distinct lines of risk . The first answer is self evident . The second answer needs a bit of clarification . The basic principal of indemnity means that you will be restored to your original position before the accident . This means you are not supposed to profit from an accident when an insurance company indemnifies you . So , you will not be able to profit by having multiple policies on one home for the same coverage . This type of fraud is specifically dealt with in the terms of the policy . However , you could theoretically get physical damage coverage through Insurance Company A and liability/medical payment protection through Insurance Coverage B . This would create a multiple policy coverage for one home . I hope this helps .
You can have multiple homes and a separate policy for each home ; or , you can have one home and a separate policy covering distinct lines of risk . The first answer is self evident . The second answer needs a bit of clarification . The basic principal of indemnity means that you will be restored to your original position before the accident . This means you are not supposed to profit from an accident when an insurance company indemnifies you . So , you will not be able to profit by having multiple policies on one home for the same coverage . This type of fraud is specifically dealt with in the terms of the policy . However , you could theoretically get physical damage coverage through Insurance Company A and liability/medical payment protection through Insurance Coverage B . This would create a multiple policy coverage for one home . I hope this helps .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
The Best Homeowners Insurance Policy is available through Stillwater Insurance Company , formerly known as Fidelity National Insurance Company . This policy is the most affordable , customer friendly and nationally accepted home insurance policy . For newer homes which are well maintained and especially for homes greater than 3,000 square feet , Stillwater Insurance makes life much easier than the competition . There are multiple discounts which are easily applied to the already competitive rates , only exterior inspections are conducted thus alleviating some of the hassles of dealing with other insurance carriers . 24 Hour Claims Reporting is available along with extended Customer Service hours and a consumer friendly website for policy access . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Yes , you can have multiple term policies . In fact , sometimes we will use multiple term polices in a clients strategy . For example , Let 's say you want $ 500k while the children are living at home . And after they move out , you only want $ 300k for about 20 years after . So if your kids move out in say 10 years , you might get a 10 year term policy for $ 200k and a 30 year term policy for $ 300k . This gives you $ 500k while the kids are home and then drops to $ 300k for an additional 20 years after they are out . And remember , there is a policy fee which you pay , which is built into the premium . Some companies will way multiple fees when you use a strategy like this , or as it is referred to sometimes , a layering strategy . If you would like to see any example of this might look like for you , feel free to reach out to me .
Yes , it is okay to have multiple life insurance policies . Insurance companies when they underwrite policies look at the amount of insurance in force , not the number of policies . Depending on your individual circumstances it may or may make sense , though.It is probably more out of pocket for you to have multiple policies . Since you would be paying multiple the policy fees and missing out on possible volume discounts . Since individual circumstances are different , I suggest you contact an independent insurance professional for advice . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Many states have a FAIR plan , which is a fund administered by the state to be a Property Insurance company of last resort . Their rates may be significantly higher but they can normally place coverage for you . Also , if you talk to an insurance agent that writes for multiple companies , there are many high-risk insurance companies that will take people with multiple claims or very bad credit , etc. . I have found very few people who ca n't get Home Insurance at some cost , but often the costs become so prohibitive that they have to either go without , or sell their home .
In most cases , you can have multiple disability policies . However , it may not make much sense depending upon the reimbursement terms of each respective policy . Most disability policies have limits on the payment amount which is most often determined by a percentage of current salary . If you have multiple policies , you will need to reveal this to each , at the time of policy purchase and/or at the time of claim submission . Multiple disability policies often occur when an employee receives a disability policy from his or her employer but wants to supplement the amount of income reimbursement , in the event of an income loss due to a disability . Often , but not always , payment from one policy will be off-set by the amount of payment from an additional disability policy , so that the policyholder does not receive more than the actual amount of income loss . Read each policy carefully , particularly as each addresses payment provisions .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
South Carolina Homeowners Insurance is similar to home insurance in any other State . You will need to have a good insurance policy to cover your home , personal belongings and personal liability coverage to protect you from legal action due to negligence . The home -LRB- dwelling -RRB- should be covered for the value to reconstruct the home following a total loss . Most insurance companies will simply ask you a few characteristic questions about your home and calculated the estimated reconstruction value of the home . Please note , the reconstruction value of the home is not relative to the current market sales price of the property which could fluctuate in differing market conditions and also includes the value of the land -LRB- which remains uninsured -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The number of life insurance policies is n't a concern except for the fact that consolidation of multiple policies can generally save you money . The real concern is why multiple policies ? One life insurance policy could cover the domestic financial liabilities , another to fund tax advantaged retirement income and still another could be for estate planning purposes . So you can have multiple polices for legitimate reasons .
You must be a mortgage broker or you 're buying your first home . I get this question all the time from mortgage company reps and first-time home buyers . There are many factors that make up a home insurance rate . Location of the home Age of the home Credit of the insured Other policies for discounts Coverage options you choose Most mortgage brokers use $ 50/m as an estimate as they work up your paperwork . My advice would be to work with a licensed agent that represents multiple insurance companies so they can shop for you .
Home Insurance can be changed at any time . A homeowner can cancel his or her insurance at any time and purchase a policy from another carrier . The unearned portion of paid premium will be returned to the Insured in an expeditious manner . A bank or mortgage company is not permitted to require a homeowner to purchase insurance from any specific insurance company . For homes not insurable under Preferred Home Insurance Programs , there are some Sub-Standard Programs which will accept homes which are not in the best of repair or which are declared a high risk to carriers , in the absence of an insurance market for the home , most States have a Fair Plan which will accept the risk sometimes on a Fire Only basis . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
In order to assess the Cost of Your Home Insurance , you must obtain a quote by answering some basic questions about the home and a few additional details for the purpose of eligibility and appropriate discounts . The characteristics of the home -LRB- i.e. year built , square footage , style of home -RRB- will help calculate the necessary reconstruction cost of the home ; prior claims experience will help the insurance company assess the probability of risk ; personal details will help assess personal discounts -LRB- i.e. marital credit , maturity credit -RRB- ; and security features will also help apply discount credits to the policy -LRB- i.e. Central Station Alarm , Full Fire Sprinklers , Gate Community -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance consists of Dwelling Coverage -LRB- Home -RRB- , Other Structures , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- , Loss of Use and Personal Liability Coverage . To answer the question , the Dwelling Coverage should be sufficient to rebuild the home from the ground up following a covered total loss ; this would be a total reconstruction estimate to rebuild the home . Most insurance carriers have a method of calculating the replacement cost of a dwelling based on the characteristics input when you request the initial quotation ; in most cases , this is a safe number to properly insure the home . Regarding Personal Liability Insurance , it is a good idea to purchase the maximum limit available since this coverage is very inexpensive and is not subject to any deductible . Most carriers offer a maximum limit of $ 500,000 for Personal Liability . If in the process of purchasing the necessary coverage , the consumer is attempting to generate a lower premium charge , it would be a good idea to accept a high deductible which will prove to offer a much lower premium with relatively low risk to the insured . There is a system available to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States . An exemplary online experience for all with the ability to select different options and adjust your home insurance quote as necessary . WEBSITELINK
The cost of Homeowners Insurance varies based on coverage limits , deductible and options selected . In order to obtain a quote for home insurance , you will need the year built of your home , the square footage of the home , type of roof , security features -LRB- i.e. central station alarm monitoring , smoke detectors , deadbolts etc. . . -RRB- and other items specific to the home . If you wish to utilize a self service online system , we have a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Your home should be covered by a Homeowners Insurance Policy with the Dwelling Coverage equal or greater to the cost of complete reconstruction of the home . In the event of a covered total loss , you will expect your insurance company to pay for the rebuilding of your home . In addition to the home itself , you will need to make sure that your Other Structures -LRB- Detached Structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and Personal Liability Limits are sufficient to cover your interest in the event of a covered risk . It is always best to speak to a licensed professional who will ask the appropriate questions to assess your risk and therefore suggest the best options to your specific case . Once you have assessed sufficient coverage for your home , you may adjust the premium by selecting either a higher or lower deductible . A higher deductible would generate a lower premium and a lower deductible would generate a higher premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
end question
start question
annuities
How Do Lifetime Annuities Work ?
The combination of mortality credits and the interest rate yield create a compelling reason to investigate lifetime income you cant outlive . Generally speaking , annuities offer payout options to their policy owners . Some elect to take out withdrawals other predetermined schedules like ten years or twenty years certain . But a popular payout option in a non-qualified annuity is annuitization for the life of the annuitant based on his or her age . This is also the exclusion ratio where basis is amortized to life expectancy as part of the initial payouts .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
It is important to note that the previous answer is specific to Immediate Annuities . More specifically Lifetime Immediate Annuities . There is also another popular form of Annuity called a Deferred Annuity . These actually will grow your funds , usually at a set interest rate , until you decide to either move the funds or to take income from them . If you decide to take income from it , you may do so the same way as an Immediate Annuity . You can choose a Lifetime Payout , a Lifetime Payout with Beneficiary Options , or a payout for a specific number of years . In short , an Annuity is a retirement savings tool that allows you to grow your money or to create an income stream from your money .
That is a complex question , if you defer payments even just a few years you can get an income rider that will pay out for your entire lifetime . Growth rates depend on whether it is a fixed annuity , or indexed , if it is lifetime payout , there is a table based on the age you begin distributions . Every year you defer income you get a larger % payout . Fixed annuities are paying 1-2 % , deferred indexed annuities can come with income riders of 4-10 % . Once distributions begin the income riders usually go away , but some products allow you to take income , while allowing the remaining funds to continue to grow . These new lifetime withdraws , are not Annuitizing , & allow any funds to be passed on to beneficiaries . Also many annuities now have a rider that doubles , or triples the account value , if you need to go into a nursing home . If your account value reaches zero , & you leave the nursing home . Your lifetime income continue at the same level as prior to going into the nursing home .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Enhanced annuities are generally immediate , lifetime income annuities that pay more in the payout period due to the health factors of the annuitant -LRB- person upon whose life annuity payments are based -RRB- . Lifetime annuities pay out until the annuitant dies -LRB- plus any guarantees built into the contract -RRB- . Annuity payments are based on actuarial tables . If the person receiving the payments lives longer than expected , it is to their advantage . Enhanced annuities or Impaired annuities pay extra because the annuitant has a shorter life expectancy . This can be due to health conditions or health habits such as smoking .
Non-qualified deferred annuities permit tax deferred accumulation in the policy . If youre in a high tax bracket , deferring ordinary income tax is a benefit in itself . If youre receiving Social Security , you can defer your annuity gains without mandatory required distributions , which could have an impact on taxation of your Social Security Benefits . Annuities can be annuitized over your lifetime generating lifetime income you cant outlive . If you annuitize your annuity for lifetime income you cant out live , the basis is paid over your life expectancy tax free as part of the payment until its exhausted . Mortality credits are added to the interest rate crediting a stream of income that can be competitive with other interest bearing accounts .
Assuming you mean annuities with lifetime income you cant outlive , there are many . Most annuity insurance companies allow their annuities -LRB- and cash value life insurance -RRB- to be annuitized for the life of the annuitant -LRB- or insured -RRB- . If an annuity is held in a qualified plan , then all lifetime distributions are taxable at ordinary income tax rates . If the annuity is a non-qualified annuity then basis is amortized over the annuitants life expectancy as part of the initial payments until basis is used up . Then only payments of gain are left to distribute for the life of the annuitant .
Here 's the quick and deadly answer . You put a bunch of money into an annuity . You get a check in 30 days . This is what the company calls immediate . The amount of the check depends on how long your annuity is ... You can choose a certain period of time - years or your lifetime or spouses/beneficiary lifetime . This is called a joint annuity .
In Canada , there are two basic types of immediate -LRB- payout -RRB- annuities , term certain and life annuities . Term certain annuities payout over a specified term and then stop . Life annuities payout over the lifetime of the annuitant -LRB- can be joint life -RRB- . Life annuities can also include a guaranteed payout option . Life annuities are only available from life insurance companies . Term certain annuities are available from available from life insurance companies and other financial institutions including banks and trust companies.There are a number of different options to consider when purchasing an annuity too numerous to cover here . You would be best served by working with an independent insurance broker who can help you find the right plan . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Assuming that the annuities the inquiry is addressing is non-qualified , the following could be true . A few retirement planners use annuities as a tax deferred holding positions for mid-range periods of five years . Some retirement planners use a combination of tax deferred annuities with a 5 year immediate , a 5 year deferred , a 10 year deferred and a lifetime annuitization immediate annuities . Many retirement planners use lifetime annuities that their clients can never outlive .
Guaranteed premium life insurance is a life insurance policy in which you get a contractual guarantee that the premium will not change . It will not increase , and it will not decrease . That is a very good deal . You do not want to have to worry about your premium changing . This product is , after all , supposed to be the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it should be dependable . Virtually all life insurance products available now provide premium guarantees . Its really just a question of how long the guarantee will last . Term insurance gives you guarantees for a specified amount of time . Could be 10 years , 15 , 20 , 30 , etc. . After that , watch out . The price could go skyhigh . Universal life could also give you guarantees for a specified amount of time . The interesting thing about this product is that since it has a flexible premium , you can determine how long you want that guarantee . It could last from a few years , to your lifetime . You can kind of make it function as permanent term insurance . No guaranteed cash accumulation , but a lifetime guarantee on the premium . And on the death benefit , by the way . Whole life typically comes with a lifetime guarantee on the premium . Thats the way the product is designed . I think you can appreciate that the longer you want the guarantee , the higher will be the premium . You get what you pay for . There you go . What else do you need to know ?
Do annuities work ? Better than anything out there that claims to be annuity like . Annuities provide a safe secure place to invest money for growth in a low risk environment . Immediate annuities provide for a lifetime payout that the insured can not out live the payments , even if the insured lives well past the annuities projected payout . Also , today 's immediate annuities come with COLA adjustments to keep pace with inflation and guaranteed payouts to beneficiaries if the annuitant dies early .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Medicare Part A covers your hospital charges such as room and board and some other hospital administered lab work and services . Part B covers doctor visits and out patient lab work . When you enter the hospital you will have a $ 1184 deductible for your hospital charges . If you are in the hospital more than 60 days you will pay $ 296 each day from day 61 thru day 90 . Hospital stays beyond 90 days puts you in your Lifetime Reserve days . From day 91 through day 150 you wil pay $ 592 each day . Once you use all of your lifetime reserve days you pay 100 % of hospital charges during that benefit period . Once used you no longer have your lifetime reserve days .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Humana Replace Medicare ?
Humana offers both Medicare Advantage Plans and Medicare Supplemental Insurance Plans . Humana Medicare Supplemental Plans do not replace Medicare ; they supplement the benefits offered by Medicare Part A and Part B. Humana Medicare Advantage Plans do not exactly replace Medicare , but they offer the full package of Medicare Part A and B and additional coverage in one package .
Humana offers both Medicare Advantage Plans and Medicare Supplemental Insurance Plans . Humana Medicare Supplemental Plans do not replace Medicare ; they supplement the benefits offered by Medicare Part A and Part B. Humana Medicare Advantage Plans do not exactly replace Medicare , but they offer the full package of Medicare Part A and B and additional coverage in one package .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
I do n't know what a lot of doctors think about Humana . Humana offers Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C of Medicare -RRB- . Part C allows insurance companies like Humana to provide Medicare benefits . They are managed health care plans such as HMOs and PPOs . Since they are managed care plans they have networks -LRB- doctor and hospital -RRB- where they want you to receive your medical care . Medicare Advantage Plans must offer the same benefits as Original Medicare but they do not have to cover every benefit the same way . These plans can have higher out-of-pocket costs than Medicare for some benefits and are required to limit out-of-pocket cost to no more than $ 6,700 in a calendar year . Some doctors may not like to work with Humana for their Medicare patients and would prefer to use Original Medicare plus a Supplement .
Yes , Humana 's Medicare Part D plan does cover the shingles vaccine . If you are in the Humana Medicare Advantage PPO plan , you must receive your immunization at a pharmacy that bills Express Scripts directly . Those not in the Humana Medicare Advantage PPO plans must call their respective insurance carriers to see where to get their shot . There will be a copay .
The shingles shot isnt covered by Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- . Generally , Medicare prescription drug plans -LRB- Part D -RRB- cover all commercially-available vaccines -LRB- like the shingles shot -RRB- needed to prevent illness . Zostavax -LRB- PF -RRB- is a Tier 4 medication under all three Humana Stand Alone PDPs Humana Walmart PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Preferred Rx PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Enhanced PDP has a 44 % coinsurance -LRB- this plan has no deductible -RRB-
Humana 's Medicare Advantage product is a Medicare HMO or Medicare Managed Care plan and I would presume you are trying to compare it to Medicare Supplement policies . In general terms , most doctors are n't thrilled with Medicare regardless if it is traditional Medicare or the new Medicare Advantage products sold by insurance carriers such as Humana or United Healthcare due to the reimbursement -LRB- payment -RRB- levels set by the government . You provide no specifics so it is impossible to give you a definitive answer . Medicare Advantage products have to cover everything Medicare covers and generally offer an even broader range of benefits to their members . However , the trade off from the consumer 's perspective with Medicare Advantage plans is that you must stay within their network of health care providers for your care to be covered . From the health care provider 's perspective they are almost certainly presented with a different payment methodology under a Medicare Advantage plan than the fee-for-service approach they have been used to and they will find their practice of medicine under greater scrutiny for the quality and effectiveness of the care they deliver . In my experience these types of physician remarks usually boil down to manner of payment and control issues . You should find a licensed health insurance agent who sells both Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage plans who can explain the specifics of what each approach does and present each one 's advantages and disadvantages . Your doctor could be giving you good advice for your particular area or they could be expressing their own prejudices .
Yes ! Humana does offer Medigap plans . Of the 11 different plans in the marketplace , Humana offers Medigap plans A , B , C , F , G , K , L , N , and High-deductible F - please note , not every medigap plan may be available and may not be sold in every area . Medigap plans are the same from every company because they 're standardized by the government . The only difference between the coverage from each carrier is the price they charge for it . Price quotes are determined by the quoted plan -LRB- s -RRB- , your age , zip code , any tobacco usage , and marital status -LRB- some carriers offer rate discounts if married and if spouses applying together -RRB- . It 's important to compare the rates from every available option in your area -LRB- including Humana and every other insurer offering Medigap plans in your zip code -RRB- so you can secure your desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . If you need quotes for Humana 's Medigap plans -LRB- as well as those from other carriers to compare to as well -RRB- , please give me a call at 888-972-0024 - that connects to my office directly -LRB- not an automated system -RRB- . You can also send me an e-mail by clicking on the `` contact me '' button next to my name . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans in most states on a statewide basis . In some states Humana also has a Medicare Advantage plan that may or may not be available in your zip code or county . In Georgia the Humana Medicare supplement plan is neither the highest priced plan nor the most competitive .
Humana can be either a Medigap or Medicare Advantage plan . They offer both options . Depending on your zip code , the Humana Medicare Advantage plan may not be available . If Humana Medigap plans are offered in your state , they would be available in any zip code . You should completely understand the difference in Advantage plans vs. Medicare supplement . In general , Advantage plans have lower premiums but considerably higher out of pocket costs . Most also have networks with severe penalties for using non-network providers . Supplement plans have higher monthly premiums , no networks , and in most cases , less than $ 500 out of pocket when your health takes a turn for the worse .
Humana is a health insurance company that offers individual and group health insurance . Humana also offers supplemental life insurance for individuals and groups . For individuals , Humana offers a Junior Estate Builder for your children or grandchildren , and a Memorial Fund for people 45 - 80 to take care of final expenses . On the group insurance side , Humana offers supplemental term life insurance for employees or spouses and dependents .
Humana offers group Term life insurance for employees , and group Term life insurance for employees ' dependents and spouses . The company also offers group Accidental Death and Dismemberment employee coverage , in addition to group AD&D coverage for the dependents and spouses of employees . Humana does not offer a private life insurance plan to individuals at this time , but does offer an Accident Benefit to individuals .
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans and Medicare Advantage in some states . Their Medicare supplement plan offerings are limited in most areas . In Georgia for example , Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , F , K , N and High F . Some of their plans are competitive but there are almost always lower priced plans from other carriers .
Humana offers two kinds of Medicare coverage . In some areas you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan . Advantage plans vary by zip code and may not be available in your home town area . Most people will want to consider traditional Medicare and a Medigap plan . Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , B , C , F , K , L , N and Hi F in Georgia . Compare rates before you buy .
Humana is a good reputable health insurance company . They offer medical coverage in most states and have a very large network of physicians , specialists and hospitals . Their rates tend to be competitive in most areas and they offer comprehensive , catastrophic , HSA and many other types of policies for individuals , families and businesses . You can easily compare Humana rates with other carriers by utilizing an experienced broker . Although as brokers , we include Humana in most quotes , it 's important to understand that they may not be the best fit for all situations .
It depends a lot on what state you are in . Humana does have HMO & PPO Medicare Advantage plans . However , people often confuse what they know about health insurance prior to turning 65 with health insurance after they turn 65 . There are big differences . It is no longer about HMO or PPO . All Medicare Advantage , HMO & PPO are basically in the same category which is a Medicare Advantage plan . It really becomes a question of do you want a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- ? One of the great features of a Medicare Supplement plan is there is `` no network '' so you can go to any doctor or hospital in any state you want . If they take Medicare they will take the Medicare Supplement regardless of carrier .
Medicare Supplement Plans are standardized by CMS . Humana 's Medicare Supplement Plans offer the same benefits as any insurance company who also sells Medigap plans . For example , Medigap Plan F with Humana has the exact same benefits as Medigap Plan F with Cigna -- the only difference is price . As Bob stated , there are often many other insurance companies with better premiums for the same exact Medigap Plan .
Medicare isa national social program administered by the U.S. government thatguaranteeshealth care coverageto allAmericans who have worked in the U.S. long enough to earn coverage . Medicare will generally cover80 % ofyour medical cost . Humana offers enhancements to the government 's coverage either with a Medigap plan which can cover the additional 20 % that Medicare does n't pay or a Medicare Advantage plan that covers all that Medicare covers with added benefits .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Is There A Penalty For Switching Car Insurance ?
This question depends on what you mean by penalty . Some insurance carriers may short rate you -LRB- hold back some of the premium -RRB- if you cancel early . Other things to consider is loss of renewal discounts some insurance carriers offer that may not transfer over to the new insurance carrier you chose . Always ask first before you switch to check to see if any fees apply .
There is no penalty I 'm aware of for `` switching '' insurers but there may be a penalty for terminating your auto insurance policy prior to its expiration date . The `` penalty '' is often 5-10 % of the unearned premium . The unearned premium is the amount the insurance company would have charged you for the coverage from the date you are cancelling to the date coverage would have normally expired . If you are `` switching '' insurers to achieve a significant premium savings or better coverage , the `` penalty '' should not be a major reason for delaying that decision .
There is no penalty I 'm aware of for `` switching '' insurers but there are often penalties for terminating an insurance policy prior to its expiration date . The `` penalty '' is often 5-10 % of the unearned premium . The unearned premium is the amount the insurance company would have charged you for the coverage from the date you are cancelling to the date coverage would have normally expired . If you are `` switching '' insurers to achieve a significant premium savings or better coverage , the `` penalty '' should not be a major reason for delaying that decision .
This is a common question most people have and the answer is yes , you can switch your insurance at any time . There is no mandate which states that you can not switch your insurance but the question is should you switch your insurance ? There are several things you want to consider before switching your auto insurance . The most common reason people switch their insurance is because of price . You will find that most states file insurance rates in January and June . So keep in mind depending on when you decide to switch your policy you could be hitting a price increase or decrease depending on what the state has filed . Switching your insurance once or even several times could actually hurt you . Companies are beginning to offer discounts such as loyalty discounts which dont kick in until you have been with them for so many years . Even though you may be saving $ 50 - $ 100 switching to another carrier you could be losing a lot more than that by not staying with your current insurance company . You may find loyalty discounts to range from 5 % -20 % depending on the company which could save you hundreds of dollars . But every situation is different so be sure to consider when your switching your insurance and what discounts you may or may not be losing .
You can switch your auto policy at any time . The most popular motivation to switch insurance carriers is price . People are looking for the best price for there insurance all the time . Other reasons to switch would be a new car purchase or moving to a new state . Switching carriers is easy and there are many to choose from . Shopping your auto insurance around is a great idea to compare prices . Using and agent can help you find insurance carriers that you normally would not have access to but going direct to and insurer online is also beneficial cutting out a middle man and getting quotes instantly . Be sure to check the term dates , is it six months or a year policy ? This can effect the way you compare the premiums . You will want to match your old coverage with your new quotes . Make sure the coverages are the same or similar this can prevent a coverage gap where you thought you had coverage . If you new vehicle is n't so new any more you may want to lower the amount of coverage on a particular vehicle . This can help lower your premium on the new policy or you can amend you current one . So while you can switch you insurer at any time do your research and make sure that it works in your favor .
The answer is yes with conditions . A person can only switch an ACA qualified plan during open enrollment which is Nov. 15th to Feb 15th . However , a person can switch to another unqualified or alternative plan from the ACA plans at ay time if he or she is willing to pay a penalty to the govt . for choosing a non-qualified plan . Incidentally , many of my clients choose to be insured under a plan outside of the govt . plans to either save premiums or just because they do n't like the Obamacare plans offered . My company , The Hinch Financial Group , offers a great alternative plan to Obamacare that is really catching fire in South Carolina . It has one of the strongest PPO networks , flexible choices , and a much lower premium . If anyone is interested in learning more please call me at 843-450-9879 or visit my website .
There is no fee that I am aware of to switch from one insurance company to another . The only reason that I am aware of that you want to switch insurance companies is lower cost . If there is a fee involved then you probably will not switch insurance companies . There is no fee to my knowledge to switch
Insurance is regulated by state . Each state can adopt a different approach to the issue that you have raised . In California , the voters took rating matters into their own hands with a constitutional amendment . Sex or gender , as you say , is not a rating factor in California . That means that in California if you switch sex , switch back and switch again , nothing will change as long as you are residing in California , and driving a car insured in California .
You are allowed to switch from a Medicare Advantage plan under certain conditions . If you are 65 or older and have been on Medicare Part B for less than 6 months you can switch to original Medicare and a Medigap . If you are in your Advantage trial right period , you can switch to Medigap . If you can pass underwriting requirements , you can switch to Medigap .
In most circumstances it probably doesnt make any difference when you switch auto policies . Cancellations are treated on a pro-rata basis by many insurance companies . Doing a switch at renewal might be easiest , though . When considering a switch there are two things to consider . The first is the effect dropping coverage with one company might have on the premiums of other insurance policies that might have been bundled . The second is that switching frequently to save a few dollars does not allow you to develop any relationship with the agent , who might be your best friend at the time of a claim .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
In essence , yes you will . But , it is called a tax penalty , not a fine . Starting Jan. 1st , 2014 if you elect not to purchase a qualified health insurance plan -LRB- minimum 60 % coverage or what 's called a bronze plan -RRB- , you will have to pay a flat tax penalty of $ 95 for each uninsured adult and half that for children , up to 3 times the single fee or $ 285 -LRB- increasing to $ 325 per adult in 2015 and $ 695 per adult in 2016 , and adjusted to inflation and cpi after that -RRB- ; or 1 % -LRB- 2 % in 2015 and 2.5 % in 2016 -RRB- of your income above the filing threshold , up to a certain percentage -LRB- depends on your income bracket -RRB- of your total income , WHICHEVER IS GREATER ! Now , of course there will be some exemptions from having to pay the tax ... If you are incarcerated , have religious exemption , not a legal US citizen , or receive welfare and the insurance premium will exceed 8 % of your income . Plus , there will be some leniency for not having coverage if switching jobs or moving out of your insurers network , and you need some time to find new coverage ; which is expected to be a 90 day grace period . But , beyond that you will be penalized for any month you do not have a qualified health insurance plan in place . So , if you go one day over the 90 day grace period , you would be fined for one month -LRB- whichever of the greater calculations , divided by 12 months -RRB- .
While this is a serious tax question it could make sense to do this switch . A Roth IRA accumulates money for retirement and there isnt any tax on the accumulation prior to withdrawal . When you withdraw funds from a Roth IRA you will not have any taxes to pay ! Check with your accountant before making this switch as there could be serious income tax consequences in the year that you make the switch .
You can switch your Medicare Supplement anytime you want to as long as you can pass medical underwriting . If you have any serious pre-existing health conditions you may not be able to switch to another company . If you can qualify with a new company you and your wife will probably be able to save a lot of money and still receive good coverage for the gaps in your Original Medicare Part A and Part B coverage . If you currently have a Plan F consider switching to a Plan G or Plan N.
Yes , you can switch life insurance companies by the process of replacement , or by dropping your old policy and purchasing a new one . If you have permanent insurance with cash value , the replacement will involve a 1035 exchange to get the cash from one policy to another . Keep in mind that when you do a replacement or get a new policy , all policy provisions , surrender charges , etc start over again . The switch is not simply switching companies . Discuss it with the agent for your old company before making your decision .
Most people consider it to be a Fixed Annuity that has a level guaranteed interest rate over the entire surrender charge period . Some Fixed Annuities have a guaranteed rate for part of the surrender period , and then switch to what they call a `` current '' rate . The `` Current Rate '' can vary with market conditions . Most Annuities that are considered `` cd type '' Annuities , have a guaranteed rate during the surrender period . Then it switches to the current rate once there are no more surrender charges . But at this time , if the owner does not like the current rate , they are free to switch to a different product with no surrender charges/fees .
You can switch health insurance pans while pregnant , but make sure to do your due diligence first . If you are increasing benefits and lowering maternity out-of-pocket costs then switching would be a great idea . On the other side of that argument , if you 're happy with your current plan and benefits you may find staying where you are until the baby is born serves you better . In the new arena of health reform and individual health insurance you can only switch during open enrollment or if you qualify for a special enrollment due to a life changing event . It 's best -LRB- pregnant or not -RRB- to find the right program and stick with it throughout the year to avoid headaches . For more information on how maternity is covered under Obamacare plans please visit www.clminsure.com
Some companies offer persons with life insurance that has been rated Standard or better , the chance to switch their Term life insurance to that company without any health requirements . Otherwise , switching coverage usually involves applying for a new policy . This can be a good thing if your original policy was overpriced , or you lost weight or quit smoking or something that would reduce the rate on a new policy , or if you wanted to lock the premium in for a longer time than your current policy did . If your current policy is a Whole or Universal Life policy , you need to contact an agent to find what would be lost by switching , or what other options exist that may be more favorable to you .
You can switch your auto insurance in the middle of a policy period . But unless your savings is enough to offset ant early cancellation penalty , you may want to wait for the renewal . To determine if it is wise to cancel early , a licensed and registered broker can help you determine the viability of changing and whether it makes prudent financial sense .
Yes , deferred annuities can be surrendered . There will be a surrender charge if you surrender your annuity in the first years of the policy -LRB- usually 5 to 8 years , whatever is stated in your contract -RRB- . And you must wait to surrender it until after age 59.5 to avoid a 10 % penalty . You can switch annuities in a 1035 exchange without paying taxes on the surrender value .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Health Insurance Covers Nuvaring ?
Nuvaring , a flexible vaginal ring , is a fairly common contraceptive used by many women in the US . It contains two hormones that work together to help prevent pregnancy . Of course , it is not 100 % reliable , but is generally considered to be safe . Many health insurers cover the Nuvaring without a copay or deductible . And The Affordable Care Act recently expanded coverage on contraceptives .
Nuvaring , a flexible vaginal ring , is a fairly common contraceptive used by many women in the US . It contains two hormones that work together to help prevent pregnancy . Of course , it is not 100 % reliable , but is generally considered to be safe . Many health insurers cover the Nuvaring without a copay or deductible . And The Affordable Care Act recently expanded coverage on contraceptives .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
The answer to your question will vary from health insurance carrier to health insurance carrier and may also be determined by whether your employer 's coverage is self-funded and they have made a determination about the coverage of nicotine gum . Coverage for smoking cessationprograms has almost universally been adopted by health insurance carriers for its obvious positive effects on the health of their members . However , what treatments and medications they will cover for smoking cessation are determined by each insurance carrier and are not uniform across the industry . You should check with your health insurance provider 's customer service department to get more detailed information about what your coverage is in this regard . My general experience is that the nicotine patch is more likely to be covered than nicotine gum . Also , there are several prescription medications that are available for use in smoking cessation and you may find that some or all of these are covered by your health insurance .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
It will depend upon what level of health insurance you purchase . Assuming you purchase major medical health insurance , it will now have to be in compliance with the Affordable Care Act . That said , what you may be purchasing can range from a `` Platinum '' level plan with very low out-of-pocket expenses for virtually all areas of health care to a `` Bronze '' plan that may not provide you any coverage at all until you have paid for more than $ 6000 in health care expenses out of your own pocket . One thing that is consistent across the four levels of health insurance plans now available -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum -RRB- is that a wide range of preventive health care services will be covered at 100 % with no cost sharing by the subscriber . Yes , you are also buying `` peace of mind '' that in the event of a serious illness or injury that your personal financial exposure is limited to that $ 6000 + number each year -LRB- which will increase in future years -RRB- and you also are now buying guaranteed access to health insurance with no pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . In the abstract I think everyone agrees that these are good things . However , depending upon your income level what you may be buying may or may not be viewed by the individual as affordable to them . Having recently completed the first open enrollment season under ObamaCare it has surprised me how many people , even ones qualifying for substantial subsidies of their monthly health insurance premiums , still elected to remain uninsured . Clearly , the perceived value proposition of what you get from buying health insurance has a very subject answer that varies greatly from one person to the next .
Most health insurance policies will cover nutrition counseling through a dietician though under what circumstances can vary significantly from one insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . Remember , many larger employers are self-insured which gives them much greater say in what is covered under their plans than groups using fully insured health insurance plans . The bottom line is that you need to look at your policy 's summary of benefits and possibly contact your insurance carrier to verify what your coverage would be , for what conditions would it apply , and for how many visits or for what length of time . Generally a medical diagnosis for a condition such as diabetes , high cholesterol and/or high blood pressure or anemia -LRB- among others -RRB- would be situations where the services of a dietician could be viewed as medically necessary . Getting sports dietary nutrition counseling so you can become a marathon runner for example would not meet that criteria and is highly unlikely to be covered under your health insurance .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Getting married may or may not have an effect on your insurance policy depending upon what actions you take . Technically adding your new spouse to your policy will not change your benefits but it may have an impact on your monthly costs . If you are covered under an individual major medical policy then you would see your monthly premium increased by the amount associated with your spouse 's age for the policy you have in force -LRB- this assumes you are covered under an Affordable Care Act compliant policy taken out on or after January 1 , 2014 when community rating went into effect -RRB- . If you are adding a spouse to an employer based policy then the financial impact will depend upon what your employer 's contribution is towards employees with dependents . Some employers contribute towards the health insurance premium costs of their employees and their covered dependents . Increasingly though , employers are contributing only towards the cost of the employee 's coverage and the employee is totally financially responsible for the difference in cost for adding a dependent to their coverage . To make things even more interesting , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- does not define spouses as dependents ! So , while the practice has not become wide spread yet , some employers are not allowing spousal coverage under their group plans -LRB- dependent children must be covered according to the ACA -RRB- . What is more common is that if your spouse is employed and their employer offers health insurance and yet you still wanted to add your spouse to your coverage , the employer could assess a penalty charge above and beyond the additional premium cost for adding a spouse in this situation . Obviously the objective here is to discourage the addition of spouses whose cost and risk could be borne by another employer . So , adding a new spouse to your health insurance coverage may not be the simple transaction that it may have been in the past . You need to explore your options and determine what the financial implications are for adding a spouse to your coverage . In some situations you may find that it makes more sense financially to purchase individual health insurance coverage for your spouse than to add them onto your group 's health insurance plan . I would recommend you find a health insurance broker to assist you with this decision making process .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
The answer to your question will vary depending upon your state of residence and what area of your state you live in as health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state and within various regions of a state . Also , how do you personally define affordable ? The plan with the lowest monthly premium will probably not cover anything except preventive care until you have met a deductible that may be in excess of $ 6000 . Is that affordable for your personal situation ? Or , would a plan with a higher monthly premium but that covers office visits and prescription drugs with a copayment and has less out-of-pocket financial exposure better suit your needs ? These are the kinds of questions you will need to be answering for yourself as you consider what health insurance coverage offers you the best value proposition . As you may have gathered , making an informed decision about what health insurance to buy is no simple matter . You would be best served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace in your state to advise and guide you in this important purchase .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Does Health Insurance Cost In Switzerland ?
Swiss resident are required to carrier health insurance , within three months of first moving to the country . Each resident pays an insurance premium for basic coverage that is equal to up to 8 % of their personal income . If the actual cost of coverage is higher , the Swiss government provides the insurance person a cash subsidy to pay any additional premium .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
Yours is an excellent question as many people do not realize that many group and individual health insurance policies do not cover them outside of the USA . There are specialized policies available to cover you when you are travelling outside the country . You should contact an insurance agent to explain your needs and to assist you in finding the policy best suited to your needs . Taking a cruise or travelling through Europe for a few weeks can be an entirely different situation than perhaps planning to be away for months or perhaps years on an overseas contracting assignment or religious or charitable mission trip . Also , your place of destination may be an important factor , working in Switzerland for a year is a totally different situation than volunteering to go to Syria or Afghanistan . If you need help with this need please feel free to contact me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Asking how much life insurance cost is like asking a realtor how much a house costs . Could be $ 30,000 or $ 30 million it depends on what you want . The factors that an agent or life insurance company would need to begin the quoting process is type of policy , how much face amount , for how long , age , build , state of residence , tobacco use andgeneral health status . From there an agent or broker can get fairly close to a premium quote but understand the underwriters have the final say on your unique premium .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
How much does health insurance cost employers ? In the 25 years I have been in the insurance business the cost of health insurance has risen just about every year . When I began the cost of providing health insurance and other benefits to employees ran about 5 % or less of payroll . In other words the cost of giving everybody health insurance was about equal to to 5 % of the sum total of everyone 's take home pay . Now nationally I believe that cost is around 15 % of payroll today .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Do I Have To Get My Medications From My Part D Provider ?
If you have a Medicare Part D Rx plan you are not required to purchase your medications through the plan . You can choose to pay cash for the full price of the medication if you wish . In most cases you will find that the full price of a medication is often much more expensive than the copay you you would pay for the medication using your Part D coverage . There are rare instances where the cash price of a medication is actually lower than the copay you would have through the plan . This usually only happens with very inexpensive generic medications that have been on the market for many years . If you are taking a brand name medication it is almost always going to be more cost effective to use your Part D plan to purchase the medication . This way you only pay a small copay instead of the full price of the drug . If you would like more information on Part D plans please visit www.medicare.gov
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
That 's funny ... I DID FIND that medication `` covered '' by a Part D Plan ... in my state ... Here is what you need to do . Go to medicare dot gov. Then click on `` Find Health and drug plans . >> > Add your Zip code >> > I usually check both of the `` I do n't know '' buttons . Just gets you through faster >> > Type in your drug name & pick the dosage . The system will default to the most common dosage/quantity >> > I chose 3 plan in my area ... ONE of the 3 DOES cover the Rx . Tier 3 level . The other two said not on formulary >> > I then popped over to Costco . You can see the cost of many medications right from their website . Not all drugs . They only list like the most prescribed . It 's a GREAT tool for comparing prices . AAHHH . I see that it is cheaper to just walk in to Costco -LRB- or mail order or go to Sam 's / BJ 's or price compare with a local pharmacy -RRB- . SO THE ANSWER IS >> > Yes . There could be a Part D that `` covers '' Cialis . You have to look at plans in YOUR area . Yet , I would like to ask a different question . IS IT WORTH having a plan that `` covers '' Cialis ? Based on the math alone ... . NO . I would n't advise it . Looks like you can buy it cheaper without `` coverage '' AND why would you want the cost to get you closer to the donut hole ? If the Rx is `` covered '' , it counts ... putting you closer & closer to the gap . YIKES !! You might need the coverage for something lifesaving one day . Shop around & get a better deal .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
This is a great question ! I like it especially because it shows that you are carefully considering before buying . That is wisdom . This type of policy is often hyped with big numbers about what it will generate for you . The reality is far too often something different . I do not recommend these policies for my clients , and here 's why . There is very little risk on the part of the insurance company . You will bear the majority of it . Are you a skilled investor ? You are expected to be , by the insurer . Are you able to spend time watching the performance of your policy investments ? Because if you are expecting a policy that you can buy and throw in a drawer and forget about , this is n't one of them . Your premium payments need to be enough to cover the cost of the insurance , which rises steadily as the policy ages . If your investments do n't do well , you are expected to increase your payments to compensate for the losses your policy is taking . If you are n't doing that , your policy draws from the cash value it may or may not have generated . It cannibalizes itself until there is no money to cover costs , and it lapses . There are very few guarantees in this type of policy . Most will only guarantee you will have coverage for twenty years . This makes them little more than very expensive term policies . Can they generate large cash values ? Yes . Can they lose money , and go belly up , costing you years of payments ? Yes . Are you someone that is okay with trying to make this work ? If so , then this may be a policy for you . In my opinion , they are a great way for agents and insurers to make a lot of money at your expense , and that is not my way of doing business . I do not sell them , nor do I recommend them , as I do not believe in their viability as a life insurance vehicle for most people . I hope that helps , and I 'd be happy to discuss it further with you , if you 'd like to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Mercury Insurance Do SR22 ?
Yes Mercury Insurance does offer SR-22 's when you purchase an auto policy providing you are eligible to obtain a policy through Mercury . Mercury will have guidelines as to who will qualify for their auto product based on your driving record . I recommend you speak with a local Mercury agent if you are interested in a Mercury policy .
Yes Mercury Insurance does offer SR-22 's when you purchase an auto policy providing you are eligible to obtain a policy through Mercury . Mercury will have guidelines as to who will qualify for their auto product based on your driving record . I recommend you speak with a local Mercury agent if you are interested in a Mercury policy .
As an agent in California Mercury Insurance is one of the companies my agency represents . Mercury does in fact offer renters insurance for those that qualify . If you are interested I suggest you contact your local Mercury agent to discuss your needs and to help you obtain renters insurance .
Mercury does offer renters insurance in NY state . Currently they are limiting the number of newly written renters policies . Mercury also writes auto insurance . You may want to consider a package with them as they give a hefty discount on auto insurance for a renters policy . It can upwards of 5 % - potentially making your renters policy free .
An SR22 is nothing more than an administrative trail of the status of your auto insurance coverage . The form is filed because the State licensing agency has determined a need to be aware of the status of your coverage , usually due to failing to have insurance or having committed any of several offenses of driving laws . An SR22 is merely attached to your insurance record and your carrier agrees to submit status updates to your state bureau of motor vehicles . An SR22 does not provide any coverage .
An SR22 is n't insurance . It is a state filing that attaches onto an auto insurance policy . an sr22 is a guarantee that you are carrying at least the state minimum auto insurance liability coverage . thus the cost of an sr22 can vary greatly , because it is highly dependent of your auto insurance rate . Things such as what vehicle you are driving , what coverages you need , your driving record , your age , and other things all go into that rating .
There are several carriers that will insure you if you have no license If you are needing to get your license and to get that you need a what is called a SR22 which means you will maintain insurance . Then you can get an insurance policy at first with no license then once you get the SR22 you get your license and then change your insurance to having a license and the rates will lower . You need to explain to your agent that you are trying to get your license and that you ca n't get it with our insurance . the average cost for a SR22 is $ 25.00 ever 6 months plus the price of insurance . Each state is different but there are carriers that will insure you .
There are several way that you can do this . There are Many carries that will insure you even if you do not have a license . Always check your state laws . There are carriers that understand that you may need a Sr22 to get your license and to do this you must have insurance so you purchase the insurance with out a license then after you get your license in place because you got the SR22 contact your agent it should lower your rates . You DO NOT have to own a car to get insurance . You can get in some states what is called a Non owned policy and also some states have what is called a broadform and this covers any car you drive I Highly suggest that you contact a reputable independent insurance agent . They should be able to guide you through the proper laws and rules for your state .
This would be a non owners Insurance and is basically an auto insurance policy without a car , so yes you can . A policy like this is very similar to a conventional auto insurance policy . SR22 can be for different reasons but the most common is for DUI and for a person who do n't own a vehicle . This will reinstate your license with the DMV as long as you keep paying your premiums until the DMV states you do n't need an sr22 any more .
Keep in mind that an SR22 really is n't insurance at all . It is a state filing that attaches onto auto insurance . For people who do not own vehicles , the SR22 can be attached to either a named operators policy -LRB- aka non-owners policy -RRB- or a broad form named driver auto insurance policy .
In Virginia , you can get an insurance policy and file an SR22 which would allow you to get your license back . You have to check with DMV to see what fines need to be paid but you can get insurance . DMV will inform you how long the SR22 is required but in most cases it 's between 1 - 3 years .
Each state has it 's statue of limitation on Workers Comp . claim . It 's highly advisable to report your injury as soon as possible . After 30-45 days you may loose your right for a workers comp . claim . It is also known , that an injury may show up after a prolong time , like limited poisoning received during an employee visit of warehouse , where mercury was spilled . In that case , you are better to get a check up and report any injury as soon as the accident was discovered .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
States have different rules but in Virginia you have to turn in your tags before cancelling your insurance . If you have tags on a car , regardless if the car is drivable or not , you have to maintain insurance . Failure to do so will result in a suspension of your driver 's license , fines and an SR22 .
Yes you can , most likely with an SR22 filing . Although it is illegal , people do drive with suspended licenses . Expect to pay a higher rate with a high risk auto insurance carrier . Many people with suspended licenses must be able to show proof of insurance before their licenses will be reinstated .
Yes . For drivers who do not own vehicles , they can purchase what is known as a named operators policy . These policies are most common when a non-owner needs an sr22 filing to reinstate their license . Some states also have an alternative option of purchasing a broadform named drivers policy . Either policy will work for non-owners . But neither policy offers comprehensive or collision coverage on the vehicle the insured is driving . Only liability , medical , and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverages are offered on this policy .
An SR22 is simply an administrative requirement by your licensing agency that your insurance carrier keep them away of the status of your coverage . This is probably due to failing to have insurance , exceeding points in their rating system , or because you got caught operating a vehicle under certain other circumstances . Unless your insurance carrier prohibits the extension of liability borrowed , rented , or use of other non-owned cars , you should have coverage but the best answer will be the one your insurance company or agent gives you .
There are carriers in Montana that can cover you with a suspended license . Some carriers in other states may have different guidelines but many will write it . If you are required to get an SR22 so you can get your license back after you have your license back the carrier will adjust your rates with a valid license .
An SR22 is a Financial Responsibility filing with the State informing them that you have either purchased either liability insurance or a financial responsibility bond . It will depend on the company renting the vehicle but most companies will rent you a vehicle . They may want you to , and it would be advisable in this case , to purchase the extra insurance they offer or talk with your agent before renting a car and ask his advice since he would be more aware of the situation .
there are 2 options , depending on the state you live in : a named operator policy or a broadform named driver policy -LRB- A third option would be a financial responsibility bond , but those are very rare . Ohio may be the only state that has it -RRB- . most states have the named operator policy , quite a few states have the broadform policy . both policies offer liability , medical payments , and uninsured motorist coverage . But neither policy offers comprehensive or collision coverage . Also , both policies will work for you if you need an SR22 or FR44 filing .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Sells Immediate Annuities ?
To find an agency that sells immediate annuities , you can go to a website or local life insurance agency that advertises them , or call to ask if they sell them . Immediate annuities are contracts between the person buying the annuity and the insurance company . Therefore , they are sold by agents who represent insurance companies .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Yes , ING does sell annuities . They have a complete portfolio of annuities including : Fixed Annuities - a type of annuity that will pay you a fixed rate of return . Indexed Annuities - an annuity that credits interest based on the performance of an index . Immediate Annuities - this annuity is for someone with a lump sum of money who is interested in immediately turning that amount of money into a guaranteed income stream . Annuities are an important retirement planning vehicle with tax deferral , death benefit , and optional living benefits .
To find an agency that sells immediate annuities , you can go to a website or local life insurance agency that advertises them , or call to ask if they sell them . Immediate annuities are contracts between the person buying the annuity and the insurance company . Therefore , they are sold by agents who represent insurance companies .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
That is a great question ! There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . An immediate annuity is one that is made with a single lump sum deposit , and the annuity begins paying out no later than a year from the contract date . A deferred annuity is a contract that may allow periodic payments , or a single payment to fund it ; and the payments do not start for a specified number of years later . It will have a number of fees and penalties attached to the early withdrawal of the funds . A deferred annuity will generally provide a much larger return on your investment because of the time between funding and annuitization , something not provided in the immediate annuity . An immediate annuity would be something to consider if you received a settlement , or large inheritance , and needed to supplement your income , and lower your tax liability . A deferred annuity would be suited for creating an income stream for later in life , understanding that once it was funded , the money would become relatively unavailable to you until then . Please be sure to have your agent walk through a good suitability study with you to ensure you get the annuity that best suits your need . Feel free to inbox me , if you have further questions . Thank you for asking !
When you say retirement annuity , I guess you are referring to an annuity that pays an income monthly ? With that being said , the annuity that you are referring to is called an immediate annuity . Immediate annuities come in many variations of length of income streams . Typically an annuity to fund retirement would be a life only with survivor benefits . Basically this annuity will pay a monthly income for as long as a Annuitant is alive and then either 100 % or as low as 50 % to a survivor , normally a spouse for the rest of their life . There are many different types of annuities however . One annuity in particular is an Indexed annuity with an income rider . This would be an alternative to the immediate annuity .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
The challenge to answering the question `` Will annuities increase ? '' is that the answer depends on the context of the question . I will provide an answer for different situations and if you would like further clarification you can contact me . In Canada , there are basically two type of annuities , immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities provide an income in exchange for a lump sum . With a deferred annuity , the income is in the future , Deferred annuities are often used as an accumulation or investment vehicle . When the investment options are guaranteed , it is similar to a guaranteed investment certificate , GIC , and could increase through interest growth . In Canada , variable deferred annuities are often referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . These are similar to mutual funds and their value can increase or decrease depending on the fund -LRB- s -RRB- performance . Since they are issued by insurance companies , seg funds do offer minimum death and maturity guarantees , typically 75 % or 100 % . Some companies also offer resets or the locking in of gains , the full details of which are outlined in the plan 's information folder . One major factor in determining the income provided from immediate guaranteed annuities is long term interest rates . If rates increase , the amount of income provided will also increase . The income from an immediate annuity can also increase after issue depending on the terms of the contact . An indexed annuity for example can provide for an increase in income each year . Another option would have part of the income dependent on the performance of a fund or pool of funds , where the income would increase or decrease depending on the funds ' performance . This is a basic overview of a potentially complex subject . Do not take any action without consulting a licensed professional . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
Annuities can be immediate or deferred , both have a place in retirement and financial planning . With an immediate annuity , you exchange a lump sum for an immediate income . Unit Linked Annuities are sometimes called variable annuities . With this type of annuity the income you receive varies totally or partially based on the performance of funds you have selected . A Deferred annuities can be thought of as an accumulation vehicle . The value of Unit linked annuities or variable annuities -LRB- called segregated funds in Canada -RRB- fluctuate based on the performance of the funds selected . If you have any further questions , please do n ot hesitate to contact me .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
The best annuities are the ones you own . If you are choosing which annuity to buy , you will find that there is a wide range of options available . There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . If you have funds that you are prepared to invest now in exchange for an income flow that starts immediately , then you want an immediate annuity , otherwise you want a deferred annuity . The range of annuities ranges from guaranteed to speculative . Some require specific licenses . The investment should be paired with your risk tolerance . The best annuity is one that does not cause you stress and meets your financial objectives .
Prudential Annuities is a business of Prudential Financial , Inc. . The annuities that are sold by Prudential include variable annuities , fixed annuities , immediate income annuities , and modified guaranteed annuities -LRB- also called market adjusted annuities -RRB- . You can call any agency that sells Prudential products to discuss . Variable annuities can only be sold by someone with securities licenses .
There is no accumulation period for immediate annuities . After you purchase the SPIA -LRB- Single Premium Immediate Annuity -RRB- with a single lump sum amount , you are able to begin receiving payments from the annuity almost immediately . Typically , you will receive your first payment one month after the immediate annuity is procured .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
An immediate annuity is the option for someone who wanted to convert a lump sum into an income stream that they could not outlive . According to the annuity , withdrawals must start within 13 months and be substantially equal payments . A benefit of an immediate annuity is that it has a blanket exemption from the 10 percent early withdrawal penalty . Immediate annuities are sometimes used when the investment portion of the retirement income plan is not meeting expectations .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Is Aflac Health Insurance ?
AFLAC is not traditional health insurance . They sell supplemtary insurance policies that cover specific events or conditions . Some of their policies cover accidents , critical illness , cancer and hospital confinement . The policies ususally run in the neighborhood of $ 20 to $ 40 dollars a month . As an illustration , the cancer policy provides a fixed dollar benefit if you are diagnosed with cancer such as $ 5,000 . If you have chemo you can a fixed dollar amount for eacy chemo treatmentlet 's say $ 350 . All AFLAC insurance policies pay you directly and not medical providers .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
What does AFLAC ' c Cancer policy pay ? I can only give you a general idea as each policy pays out different amounts , depending on the level of coverage you purchase . With that said , AFLACs Cancer policies usually pay for : Cancer tests such as Mammographies cervical screening colonoscopies , daily hospital benefit for room and board , some cancer drugs , cancer surgical benefits , anesthesiologist , daily doctor visits while you are in the hospital , blood , plasma , radiation therapy , chemotherapy , reconstruction after surgery , daily visits to the hospital by the patients doctor , benefits for travel to a cancer center including hotel , airfare , gas for your car to get there , ambulance benefits . These are some of the main coverages , but remember that there either annual or lifetime limits as to how much AFLAC will pay , it all depends on your policy .
I will assume that your daughter is covered as a dependent under your AFLAC policy . AFLAC is not major medical health insurance , it is a supplement to major medical insurance designed to pay directly to the policyholder as opposed to a health care provider . AFLAC 's policies are designed to deal with specific types of situations such as a critical illness -LRB- which they spell out specifically what conditions qualify as a critical illness -RRB- , cancer , short term disability , hospital indemnity plans , accidents and life insurance . Other than the slight chance of a short term disability policy coming into play or some aspects of a hospital indemnity policy if your daughter was covered and met the contract terms for being hospitalized and/or disabled , I do not believe there will be circumstances where an AFLAC policy would pay out for a person diagnosed with Scoliosis .
If you are an employee at a business that has offered Aflac to its employees through a section 125 cafeteria plan -LRB- a tax-advantaged funding method that allows a person to fund their premiums with a portion of their earnings before they obtain `` constructive reception '' of the money , thus lowering their adjusted gross income and avoiding FICA and FUTA taxes -RRB- . You are able to obtain short term disability with adjustable `` elimination periods '' -LRB- how long you wait before you start to get your disability payments -RRB- and payment periods -LRB- how long you get your short term disability for -RRB- . With Aflac STD you can even return to work and continue 100 % of your STD payments as long as you are making less then 80 % of what you were previously making . How much you recieve will depend on your earnings , due to the principal of unjust enrichment you are prevented from making a profit from your disability and thus can only suppliment your normal income up to a stated percentage-generally about 70-80 % .
No Aflac specializes in indemnity policies . These pay the policy holder a specified sum upon a qualifying event . I frequently will include Aflac 's policies in a group health planproposal they do serve a very valuable function just as a stand alone policy . However they areextremelyeffective in helping to manage costs while delivering high quality health plans .
No , Aflac does not offer a traditional Long Term Care Life Insurance product at this time . Aflac does carry a Critical Care and Recovery Insurance policy that would pay a cash benefit to the insured person if they were diagnosed with some serious , life impacting illnesses or health conditions as specified by the policy .
No , Aflac is a life & health carrier , offering supplemental policies , that pay you not the doctor or hospital . If you have an injury for example , Aflac would pay you for sickness or injury . Auto , home owners , liability , & commercial insurance , would be considered property & causality insurance . Think of it as P&C covers your property , & any liability for causality or risk you would incur .
No . AFLAC is a supplementary insurance products insurance company that offers a variety of supplementary and voluntary insurance products . One of the products in their portfolio is a disability insurance product . But , AFLAC offers other lines of coverage such as accident policies , cancer policies , critical illness policies and life insurance policies .
AFLAC is not traditional health insurance . They sell supplemtary insurance policies that cover specific events or conditions . Some of their policies cover accidents , critical illness , cancer and hospital confinement . The policies ususally run in the neighborhood of $ 20 to $ 40 dollars a month . As an illustration , the cancer policy provides a fixed dollar benefit if you are diagnosed with cancer such as $ 5,000 . If you have chemo you can a fixed dollar amount for eacy chemo treatmentlet 's say $ 350 . All AFLAC insurance policies pay you directly and not medical providers .
To find the price of AFLAC Life Insurance , contact an American Family Life Insurance agent . The price will depend on your age , sex , health factors , amount of life insurance you are looking for , and type of policy you desire . If you want to compare the AFLAC quote with other life insurance quotes on the internet , you can visit a site with a free life insurance quote engine and input your information . Be sure to compare prices for the same product when making your decision . E.g. Do n't compare a 10 year Term quote with a 20 year Term quote ; make sure both are the same number of years and are both guaranteed not to go up in price for the same number of years .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Unfortunately , you are not able to purchase Aflac short term disability insurance as an individual . To buy Aflac 's short term disability coverage requires that you are employed by a business that offers it , and then it is paid for by payroll deduction . You would need to contact the business you work for to get the rates for this insurance .
Aflac life insurance is sold through American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus and American Family Life Assurance Company of New York , with group policies sold through Continental American Insurance Company . Aflac and its companies were rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . They have been selling good term and permanent products since 1955 .
Aflac is not long term care insurance . Aflac stands for American Family Life Assurance of Columbus , and the company sells a number of types of policies to groups and individuals . They do not carry a specific long term care insurance policy , although a few of their policies cover conditions that can lead to the need for long term care .
Aflac sells in indemnity policies . Thesepolicy ` spay cash for qualifying event . Aflac is a great thing to have inadditionto your medical coverage but is notmeantto replace it .
American Family Life Assurance Company , or AFLAC , was rated A + by AM Best in May of 2013 . That is the second highest rating given by AM Best . While many of Aflac policies are group policies , they do sell Life Insurance in individual policies .
AFLAC disability insurance is really no different than any other company 's disability policy when it comes to the rules of taxation . If you paid your premiums with your post tax or after tax dollars then your disability benefits should not be taxed . If your employer pays your premiums and writes them off on the company taxes , then the disability benefits would be taxed as ordinary income and you will receive a 1099 from the insurance company or AFLAC in this case .
To obtain the cost for Aflac Disability Insurance for you , you need to contact their company or a local American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus agent . The price will depend on a number of factors and the type of policy you choose . An Aflac agent can guide you through those choices and help you get the Disability policy that works best for you and your budget .
AFLAC is a company that offers supplementary benefits to individuals and families . Typically , these benefits will be monthly payments designed to help cover expenses from gaps in other insurance plans -LRB- such as health insurance -RRB- . They are not primary policies and are not designed to replace , for example , a disability or health insurance contract that you currently pay for .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Get Car Insurance With An Out Of state License ?
Yes , you probably can , but it would be a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your new home state . Many states and insurance companies will allow you to obtain car insurance with an out of state license . It will more than likely be required by your new state 's DMV in order to register your cars . However , there will more than likly be a time limit during which time you should obtain a new license in the state you are nor residing .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
There are several way that you can do this . There are Many carries that will insure you even if you do not have a license . Always check your state laws . There are carriers that understand that you may need a Sr22 to get your license and to do this you must have insurance so you purchase the insurance with out a license then after you get your license in place because you got the SR22 contact your agent it should lower your rates . You DO NOT have to own a car to get insurance . You can get in some states what is called a Non owned policy and also some states have what is called a broadform and this covers any car you drive I Highly suggest that you contact a reputable independent insurance agent . They should be able to guide you through the proper laws and rules for your state .
As Ms. Harvelle put it , the requirements in terms of hours can vary state by state . Google it , be sure to include `` for X state '' in your query , then try and walk through what the website says . I put it this way because in many cases the department of licensing or labor websites for states can be pretty dry reading . So take a peek there , but just know that normally you have to hit a certain number of verifiable hours of study , then take and pass the test , then apply and pay for the license . Also , there are some states that will recognize the work you put into another state 's licensing program , and will offer to mirror your license in their own state , for a nominal fee . That way , you can be licensed to sell life insurance in more than one state but can potentially avoid having to go through the entire process more than once .
There are several carriers that will insure you if you have no license If you are needing to get your license and to get that you need a what is called a SR22 which means you will maintain insurance . Then you can get an insurance policy at first with no license then once you get the SR22 you get your license and then change your insurance to having a license and the rates will lower . You need to explain to your agent that you are trying to get your license and that you ca n't get it with our insurance . the average cost for a SR22 is $ 25.00 ever 6 months plus the price of insurance . Each state is different but there are carriers that will insure you .
How to get certified to sell life insurance ? I think a better term may be licensed to sell life insurance . For most people in most states as insurance licensing is a state by state thing , it involves a short class that goes through a generic overview of insurance laws and products . Then the person wishing to license must sit for an exam that upon passing , allows for them to be licensed in the state they will be practicing in.An agent can license in mulitple states , sometimes just by paying the fees . Some states may require addtional testing or that certain subject matters be completed .
The cost of a life insurance license varies from state to state . Once you are licensed in your own state -LRB- your `` resident '' license -RRB- , you can then obtain `` nonresident '' licenses in other states , which will also have different fees . Here is a helpful website that lists the State Dept of Insurance for each of the 50 states in the US , so that you can find the cost for resident and nonresident licensing in each state . WEBSITELINK
It is true that some states do not separate their life insurance license from their health insurance license , the majority of states do have these two license separate . To sell disability insurance requires a health insurance license . There is at least one state that considers disability a separate license but does so under the health insurance license so no further examinations are required . You may also take disability specific continuing education course credits to learn more and they will count in most states towards your CE points for both life and health license requirements .
Typically , you can not drive with a suspended license and certainly not without a valid license . If you do , you risk arrest , fine or both . Occasionally , an exception can be made in special circumstances when a `` hardship '' situation exists . It may involve a sick relative or possibly a scenario where you are given limited privileges to drive to work or school . An SR-22 Bond is frequently utilized in circumstances where a license has been suspended , or it is a condition of reinstating the license . Each state is different . And in these situations , you would have to obtain car insurance coverage that equals at least the state minimum liability limit . In many states , the minimum required liability limit is $ 25,000 per person , $ 50,000 per occurrence and an additional $ 25,000 of property damage . However , some state have higher limits while other states have lower limits or are `` no-fault '' states . IMPORTANT : The answer to this question was provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier car insurance experts with more than 34 years of experience . Harris manages several top-rated websites , including carinsurancezoom.org , which provides the lowest auto insurance rates to consumers from the largest carriers . Our clients receive unbiased service and advice at any time .
To sell disability insurance , you will need to have a health insurance agent license . Some states may also ask for you to have a life license as well so I would recommend checking with your brokerage you have your contracts through or contact the carrier directly to speak with someone in the agent services department to get an answer for a specific carrier and/or state . Please note , many states charge the same fees whether you 're getting a health license only or both life and health . I would recommend getting your life license as well even if you do n't primarily sell life insurance because you never know if there is an opportunity for a life insurance sale on top of the health insurance sale . Just my two cents on the question . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
A life insurance license is what gives you the right to sell life insurance . Life insurance licenses are governed by state regulators . You must take educational courses and pass an exam to get your license . There are fees to pay and conduct codes to meet , then you must take continuing education to keep your license . If you want to sell life insurance in more than one state , you must get a license in each state .
The short answer is it depends upon the state . One of the most basic principles of insurance is a person/company must have an insurable interest in the property . In order to have an insurable interest in an automobile a person must have a valid drivers license and sometimes a registration . If a state allows an illegal immigrant to obtain a drivers license , then that person can obtain auto insurance . If the person can not obtain a drivers license from that state , he can not obtain auto insurance and even being behind wheel is illegal . Political debates aside , an illegal immigrant should find a state where he/she can register for a drivers license and get auto insurance . This not only benefits them because they will get property and liability coverage , but it will also benefit other drivers because it provides them something to recover from in the case of an accident .
Yes , you probably can , but it would be a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your new home state . Many states and insurance companies will allow you to obtain car insurance with an out of state license . It will more than likely be required by your new state 's DMV in order to register your cars . However , there will more than likly be a time limit during which time you should obtain a new license in the state you are nor residing .
In order to get a life insurance license in Pennsylvania you must complete any pre-licensing requirements and then take and pass the state insurance licensing exam . Once you have passed the exam the state will issue your resident producer 's license . You will also be subject to a background check before the state will issue your license .
To become a licensed life insurance agent in your state first go to your state 's website and search for the Department of Insurance or DOI . There you will find your state 's requirements for becoming licensed . There are several variations for meeting your state 's requirements . Usually it will include 30-40 hours of either live classroom training or online training . They include study work to earn a certificate to take your exam usually at a live monitored location in your state . Most states also require a background investigation and or finger prints . All of these fees are usually at your expense . However there are companies that will pay your fees if you look for them . Some states also require you be appointed to an insurance company before your license is issued and others will just issue the license . I recommend shopping companies and agencies while in the process to see who may have the best training program in place to get you started .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
You have to go through training at certified licensing company that has been approved through the state such as an Insurance company . After training you will contact the state insurance testing and licensing bureau . After passing the state test for Life Insurance licensing you will receive your license after meeting all state requirements . Now you are ready to contract with a Life Insurance company in the state . Now you can sell annuities after meeting that companys criteria .
In order to get an insurance license in Alabama you will need to complete any pre-licensing requirements and then take the state licensing test . The state of Alabama will also require that you complete a background check . Upon completion of both items the state will issue you a resident producer license which will allow you to write life insurance contracts in the state .
The license needed for disability is a health insurance license . However , something just to consider , go ahead and get both your life and health insurance license . You will find that most clients in need of disability also will need life insurance and vice versa . Also , some states will not grant you reciprocity unless you have both your life and health license . You may wish to cross license in other states as you grow your practice and this will become an issue . It really does n't cost much more or take too much more of your time to carry both license together . Good luck !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medicare Medical Part B Cover ?
That is a great question ! Jason gave you a great rundown of services and costs . If you would like to know more about your Medicare coverage and services you are eligible for , go to the Medicare website WEBSITELINK as it is really helpful . There are a ton of links and places to look for answers . Thanks for asking !
Medicare Part B is your physician insurance - it covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers 80 % of the costs . Most people who have Part B will also have Part A -LRB- your hospital insurance -RRB- - Part A is premium-free for most people . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % . The advantage of a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- a very helpful ability for retired persons on a fixed income -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance.It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It 's a personal decision . Many people get a Medigap Plan -LRB- aka Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- for peace of mind . Medicare Supplement insurance is designed to fill in the `` gaps '' that Medicare does n't cover . So , if you stick with just Original Medicare Part A & B , you leave yourself open to paying the 20 % that Medicare does n't cover . In addition , you are responsible for the Part A and Part B deductible . The Part A -LRB- Hospital insurance -RRB- deductible in 2014 is $ 1216 The Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- deductible in 2014 is $ 147 I spoke with a Medicare Beneficiary who wanted to add a Medicare Supplement because she had some health issues and the treatment was getting expensive . Unfortunately , she could not get approved for a policy because of her current medical conditions . The point is ... we do n't have a crystal ball to predict our health . If you 're healthy now and it does n't seem necessary to spend the money on a Medigap Plan , then think about the long term effects . As we age , our health changes and you may end up paying a lot more in medical bills . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Be Denied Health Insurance In Maine ?
You ca n't be denied under ` Obamacare ' . Plans that you can purchase off the Exchange -LRB- like mine -RRB- , often do have underwriting involved and you may be turned down . Those companies keep their costs down by only accepting healthy people . Shop around and find what 's best for you and your situation .
The main reason -LRB- s -RRB- a life insurance would deny Life Insurance are : 1 -RRB- Medical Issues -LRB- pre-existing conditions -RRB- 2 -RRB- Your financials do not warrant the benefit amount you are seeking If they deny due to medical reasons , you could apply for a `` simplified issue '' product . This is not guaranteed , but there is no paramed -LRB- medical exam -RRB- so it may be easier to get issued . Of course , the premium is higher , but it may be an alternative .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
A spendthrift clause is occasionally used in a trust . It limits the ability of the beneficiary of a trust to promise all or part of the trust to a third party prior to the death of the person forming the trust . This is done to stop a young beneficiary from foolhardy investments based upon future funding of a trust from his doting aunt in Maine . The trustee is instructed to give money to the beneficiary and to deny all claims by third party interests .
Currently in most states you can be denied individual health insurance if your pre-existing conditions are severe or costly . As a result of Obamacare , most states do not have child only health insurance plans . In most cases you can not be denied employer group health insurance plan coverage . All this will change in 2014 when carriers can not deny you but expect premiums to be 2x current levels .
How to determine how much life insurance one needs is an exercise that all conscientious insurance agents go through with every client . It is a dereliction of duty not to do so . Of course once the need is determined it still remains up to the client how much to put in place . In determining the amount of insurance needed , of primary importance is to define what the goals are of the insured . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide for dependents then the requirements for that provision will be the main determining factor for the amount needed . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide additional income in retirement then that requirement will be the determining factor . So to answer your question depends on who the insurance is for . If it is for you , you should talk with an Insurance Adviser .
I assume you mean `` can a life insurance company deny coverage '' and the answer is yes . A life insurance carrier can deny coverage for many reasons including health , lifestyle and financial considerations . The only type of coverage which can not deny a policy is called `` guaranteed issue '' and those policies have a 2 year waiting period before coverage begins , except for accidental death .
It 's just the main doctor you choose normally in HMO since they require you to see your main doctor before being referred to a specialist . He 's basically your main doctor and if he is unable to treat you for whatever reason , he will recommend and refer you to another doctor in the network more qualified to treat you .
People should not apply for life insurance policies for which they know they will be denied . You can know ahead with some policies because they have criteria that you must meet . E.g. . They may not approve if you use oxygen , or if you weigh over a certain amount . Sometimes , the only way you can know if you will be denied is by asking an agent who is familiar with that company 's underwriting guidelines . Sometimes , people apply for policies where they are not sure if they will be denied or not . I.e. . They have risk factors , but appear to meet the underwriting guidelines . It is not always possible to be able to tell ahead of time whether you will be declined or not . The final word will come from the underwriter after the underwriter reviews your medical records . One thing is certain : you can decrease your chance of being declined by using an agent who understands your health and risk factors , and who can match you up to the policy that best meets your needs . Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have a risk that might cause your life insurance to be denied . I can help you avoid an unnecessary decline and help you find an affordable policy .
If you applied for Health Insurance and your application was denied , the company you applied to will have to give you a reason why it was denied . They should mail you a letter stating a reason . Since the Affordable Care Act was passed you can not be denied based on your health history , so as long as you are providing truthful , relevant info on the app , getting health insurance should be easy .
The short answer is it depends . When you turn 65 and start your Medicare Part B you will get a 6 month window where you can choose any Medigap Insurance Plan you like . There will be no health questions and you can not be denied . After you turn 65 and are past the 6 month window of signing up for Medicare Part B then you can still get a Medigap Plan . With most carriers there will be 10-12 health questions that you will need to answer in order to get approved . Working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance will help you to choose the insurance carrier that fits your health situation the best . Most of the health questions are centered around big and recent health issues . I would not be concerned with getting denied I would just contact an expert to help you through the process . Once you have a Medigap Insurance it is guaranteed renewable which means it can never be canceled on you as long as you pay the premiums . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
Assuming that all the cards are on the table and the agent really knows what they are doing , declines should not happen too often . But even in that case , here are some reasons people can be denied life insurance . 1 -RRB- Medical reasons that even they may not realize or think about when they talk to their agent . E.g. . The applicant takes two medications for depression , which is insurable . But when the underwriter looks at the medical records , they find that the patient has recently expressed suicidal thoughts to their psychiatrist , and the policy is denied . 2 -RRB- Insufficient medical information . E.g. . The underwriter wants to see the results of an MRI and no one can find it . 3 -RRB- Tobacco with a serious health condition that is impacted by smoking . E.g. Someone says they quit smoking when they had a heart attack a year ago , but then tobacco is found in lab results . 4 -RRB- Financial reasons . E.g. . The applicant is in the middle of bankruptcy proceedings , has a very poor credit rating , and owes back taxes . Rather than calling this a decline , it is often called a postponement . 5 -RRB- Wrong product . This is the most common reason for decline I hear about when people come to us after being declined elsewhere . They were just told to apply with a product that clearly does not work with their health and personal details . That is a completely avoidable reason for being denied . As you can see by the examples above , some people would be better off going with a No Exam policy to lessen their chances of being denied . Others are better off using medically underwritten coverage . Using an agency that specializes in taking cases declined by others can help you get an approval the first time .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may be denied coverage . If you are not in your initial Open Enrollment period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Policy . Therefore , it 's best to get a Medigap Policy when you think you do n't need one . Often times people wait until a health condition arises because they think the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- will apply . With that said , each insurance company has unique health questions . One insurance company may deny rheumatoid arthritis while another is okay with it . In other words , do n't assume you will be denied . An independent agent can review your health history and let you know if you can apply for a Medigap policy .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
You can still get life insurance . Which plan will depend on the reason for denial . There are some plans that do not ask if you have ever been denied insurance . If you can answer the rest of the health questions with a no answer you can get the insurance . I have a couple plans that ask no health questions at all . Just because you are denied insurance by one company does not mean you can not get insurance through another .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is An Annuity A Qualified Retirement Plan ?
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
An annuity is inherently a non-qualified insurance product . A qualifies plan is generally an ERISA -LRB- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -RRB- sanctioned retirement plan like an employer sponsored 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or an individual plan like an IRA . You can fund a qualified plan with an annuity , but all distributions from the annuity in the qualified plan , including basis , are taxable as ordinary income .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
Non-qualified retirement plans are not sanctioned for the tax deduction like qualified plans are under ERISA . Non-qualified retirement plans generally use annuities and life insurance . Annuities can be used in qualified plans , but life insurance can not . Non-qualified and qualified retirement plans using annuities , for an example , accumulate tax deferred , but the basis of a non-qualified annuity is distributed free of taxation , whereas qualified annuities are fully taxable including basis .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
A qualified annuity differs from a non-qualified annuity , which is an annuity funded with after-tax dollars . While distributions -LRB- contributions to a qualified annuity are pre-tax -RRB- from a qualified annuity are taxed as income , distributions from a non-qualified annuity are not subject to income tax in their entirety . Qualified annuities are often set up by employers on behalf of their employees as part of a retirement plan .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
An annuity is a savings or investment product depending upon the definition of an annuity such as security product like variable annuities versus a non-security fixed annuity product . An IRA is an individual retirement account which is a qualified plan and not product that can hold investments as well as insurance products like annuities . A qualified plan in and of itself is an IRS code permitting special tax treatment but without a product is an empty economic storage bin . An annuity is a product , which can be in a qualified plan or remain a non-qualified annuity . Strictly on the basis of the question , Is An Annuity Better Than An IRA ? Yes , an annuity is better than an empty shell .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
A Qualified Retirement Plan simply means it is a `` qualified '' account as defined by the Internal Revenue Service . A qualified account simply means there are limitations to the contributions and rules to when you can take the monies out without getting a penalty . A Qualified Retirement Plan can be an IRA , Individual Retirement Account or a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- offered through your employer . A Roth IRA is a Qualified Retirement Plan . There are other qualified plans out there as well however the plans I have mentioned are the most popular . Seek your broker/adviser for more information and to talk about which plan you should focus on or have available to you .
On if the Annuity is already in a Qualified Retirement Account . An IRA is a type of Qualified Retirement Account . That basically means the money in the account was contributed on a pre-taax basis . Qualified Retirement Accounts usually can be transferred from one account to another as a general rule . -LRB- there are a few exceptions to this -RRB- But if the Annuity is a non-qualified Annuity then you are not able to transfer it -LRB- it is technically a transfer not a rollover -RRB- to an IRA . And there is no need to do so . An IRA has a less favorable tax status than a non-qualified annuity . It would not be a benefit to transfer it to an IRA .
There are a lot of different kinds of annuities available from dozens -LRB- perhaps even hundreds -RRB- of insurance companies . Annuities are offered by insurance companies and primarily used as a means of securing a steady cash flow during retirement years . In many ways , an annuity is very much like a pension plan offered by a company for retirement . Perhaps the best feature of an annuity is safety . Insurance companies are rated as a measurement of financial strength and have proven over the past 125 years or so to have financial stability second to no other type of financial institution . In today 's world where fewer and fewer employers offer a pension , planning for a reasonable retirement income stream seems to be challenging for most workers . An annuity -LRB- or even several -RRB- can provide the type of retirement income security that previous generations have enjoyed . Should an annuity be the only retirement income vehicle for you ? Absolutely not . Your retirement income plan should be balanced in a way that works for you . You should always seek the advice of a qualified retirement income planner so that strategies and products can be tailored to your individual situation .
An annuity is inherently a non-qualified insurance product . A qualifies plan is generally an ERISA -LRB- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -RRB- sanctioned retirement plan like an employer sponsored 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or an individual plan like an IRA . You can fund a qualified plan with an annuity , but all distributions from the annuity in the qualified plan , including basis , are taxable as ordinary income .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
The first step in product selection of an annuity is establishing your risk tolerance profile and purchasing product accordingly . The second , specific to this question , is should the retirement account be qualified or a non-qualified retirement account . And lastly , how many years until you retire ? The younger you are the more time you have and may be able to take on risk . The answers to these questions will determine whether you select annuities with fixed interest rates , indexed rates or separate sub accounts using equities and/or bond instruments . If your effective tax liability is low , consider non-qualified retirement plan . If youre effective tax liability is high , consider a qualified retirement plan , especial if your employer matched the contributions .
It depends what type of Annuity it is and if the Annuity is in a Qualified Retirement Account or not . If it is in a Qualified account , like an IRA/401k/SEP , then any distribution is 100 % taxable . If it is a non-qualified account , then only withdrawals of the gain are taxed -LRB- as income -RRB- . But since Annuities use LIFO , the gain will be the first part of the Annuity that is distributed . The growth of a non-qualified Fixed Annuity is tax deferred . If it is an Immediate Annuity/Lifetime Annuity , then again it depends on the tax status . For a Qualified account 100 % of the distributions/income will be taxable . For non-qualified , a portion of the payments will be tax-free and considered a `` return of basis/premium '' .
A qualified annuity is one that is a part of a qualified retirement plan . For most people that means an IRA , Roth IRA , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- or similar plan . The rules governing the treatment of the tax annuity are contained in the appropriate sections of the Internal Revenue Code . A non-qualified annuity is not a part of a qualified retirement plan .
Variable annuities first manufactured by the Teachers Insurance and Annuities Association-College Retirement Equity Fund -LRB- TIAA-CREF -RRB- in 1952 . Interestingly enough , the first variable annuities were qualified annuities were built for qualified retirement plans or more specifically to fund pensions . Today variable annuities have evolved as a non qualified product as well .
Non-Qualified is a term generally used for non ERISA retirement plans or qualified plans . A life insurance company does n't manufacture qualified products . Annuities , like life insurance , start out as non-qualified product lines not under the jurisdiction of ERISA . Non-qualified annuity payouts distribute basis tax free , whereas qualified annuity payouts are all taxable , even basis .
end question
start question
other-insurance
Why does it cost more to insure an employee who 's paid more , for doing the same job with the same risk as an employee who 's paid less ?
That is a great question , with a very simple answer - while the risks for both employees are the same , the cost of covering their losses is n't . To replace the salary of the higher paid employee will obviously cost more than the lesser paid employee . Workman 's comp and disability pay a percentage of your pay , so the higher priced guy costs more . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
The workers compensation benefit payable to a more highly compensated individual is greater than the benefit paid to a lower paid individual . The same is true for disability insurance . The premium is general the rate times the benefit . The greater the benefit the higher the premium . All of this is dependent upon the calculation for the benefit .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
For the W2 employees and perhaps for dedicated 1099 contractors of an S Corporation the employer paying for or towards these employee 's coverage is quite straight forward . From a tax and accounting perspective its gets more complicated for persons who are more than 2 % eligible shareholders in the company . The bottom line is that company paid insurance premiums for more than a 2 % shareholder must be treated as wages to that owner/shareholder . So , the only way the S-Corp can deduct the amount it pays towards owner health insurance as a business expense is by including it as part of the shareholder 's salary . Owner -LRB- s -RRB- health insurance costs can no longer be declared as an insurance expense or employee benefit expense on the S-Corp 's taxes . The effect on the S-Corp 's net income is the same , but this does result in an increase in net taxable income for the owner -LRB- s -RRB- / shareholder -LRB- s -RRB- . It is possible that the owner/shareholder will recapture some of this by deducting it from their Adjusted Gross Income on their Form 1040 . However , the situation can be further complicated by various state laws that may not allow for a one-person corporation to purchase health insurance for the owner and effectively forcing them to purchase individual health insurance coverage that they pay for themselves . And , just to make things even more complicated , if the owner/shareholder or their spouse is eligible to participate in any other subsidized health plan they ca n't take the deduction from Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- AGI -RRB- on their 1040 for medical insurance premiums paid for by the S-Corp . So the answer to your question is sometimes `` Yes '' and sometimes `` No '' because a variety of circumstances can influence the answer . My advice is to seek out an experienced health insurance broker who can determine your specific circumstances and advise you on how to approach them .
Great question ! Employers offer health insurance as a benefit because it is a way to attract and keep good employees . That is why there are benefit packages , paid vacations , and 401ks . If all they had to offer was wages , people would move from job to job even more than they do already . A good insurance and benefit plan can be a great incentive to stay . The companies buy a policy for the employees , they own it , and often pay a significant part of the employees ' costs . That is why when you leave a job , the insurance does not go with you - you do n't own it , like you would if you had purchased the policy on your own . Any more questions , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to answer ! Thanks for asking !
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
There remains a lot of confusion over this issue in the wake of the passing of the health care reform law -LRB- ObamaCare , the Affordable Care Act -RRB- and justifiably so . Technically speaking , ObamaCare does not force any employer to offer health insurance to their employees , their is no criminal penalty for failure to do so . That point made , the Affordable Care Act consists of a mix of tax incentives and tax penalties to supposedly induce employers to provide health insurance for their employees . First of all , for employers with 2 to49 employees there are no tax penalties at all for failure to provide health insurance to their employees . A tax credit is offered but with enough limitations associated with it that only a tiny percentage of small employers have ever taken advantage of it . For employers who are at and above the 50 full time and/or full time equivalent employee level they will be the ones who will be faced with tax penalties for failing to provide health insurance and/or failing to provide affordable health insurance to their employees . The first employers to be impacted will be those with 100 or more full time employees in 2015 . Then , starting in 2016 , employers in the 50 to 99 employee range will be subject to the same tax penalty . The tax penalty will be $ 2000 per employee per year and will be a non-deductible business expense . Not surprisingly , the situation is more complicated than I have just described but there is not space here to go into all the details involved . Suffice it to say , this is an issue of great concern to many employers , especially ones who have not offered health insurance to their employees or a large segment of their employees in the past . The restaurant , hospitality and trucking industries are some common examples of industries that can expect to be adversely impacted financially by the tax penalty . For consultation on this issue please feel free to contact me .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
It depends upon the circumstances of your departure . In the extreme case where a person is `` terminated for cause '' , punching the boss in the nose for example , then your coverage may be terminated as you are heading out the door . While each employer has their own internal personnel policies regarding employees leaving the job , generally you will be covered until the end of your last month of employment because you have probably had money withheld from your paycheck to pay for that month 's premium . When an employee resigns from a company or is terminated/laid off under normal circumstances then the ex-employee has the legal right to continue their coverage under their former employer 's health plan for some period of time . If the employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation provisions -LRB- which vary from state to state -RRB- will apply . If the employee has 20 or more employees then the Federal COBRA provisions apply where most people can continue their coverage for up to 18-months and even longer in some situations such as divorce . It is the ex-employee 's responsibility to inform their former employer that they will be continuing their coverage and it is the ex-employee 's responsibility to pay the full premium on time each month .
I believe what you are referring to is what 's called `` split-dollar '' life insurance . This type of life insurance is generally used for businesses to help an employee purchase coverage - it can be used as a form of deferred compensation or as an incentive for the employee to work at that company . The idea of a split-dollar policy is to share or `` split '' aspects of the program between two parties -LRB- again - generally employer and employee -RRB- , including ownership , premiums , death benefits , cash value , and dividends . The advantages for the employee in doing this type of policy is to get the coverage they need to protect their family , but at a cheaper price . When the employer is paying premiums , the employee may be able to reduce their income tax liability when in higher tax brackets . Upon the death of the employee , the proceeds can be used to provide for estate liquidity . So why would the employer do all of this rather than make the employee buy an individual policy on their own ? In short , tax purposes . While it allows the employer to provide benefits to their employee with low costs , the portion of premiums the employer pays can be deducted for tax purposes . Upon the death of the employee , the employer is paid an amount equal to the sum of premiums paid on behalf of the deceased employee . These plans feature a good amount of flexibility for the employer as well , as they can modify or terminate the program at their discretion .
Long term care insurance provides benefits that extend beyond those paid under Medicare and most private insurance . The benefit is normally paid in months and at a predetermined level . The extremely helpful insurance is sometimes offered as a benefit by employers . If the employer pays the premium , the employer is able to deduct that cost from his own taxes as a reasonable business expense -LRB- employee benefit . -RRB- The employee does not incur any income tax liability as a result . When a benefit is received it comes to the employee free of income tax . There arent any non-discrimination rules that require an employer cover all of the employees . Executives should consider accepting an Employer Paid Long Term Care Insurance policy in exchange for a salary reduction . It is a win situation for the employer and also a win situation for the highly valued employee . This benefit can be combined with a more comprehensive medical health care plan that includes additional benefits such as a comprehensive annual physical examination . This benefit can also be combined with a supplemental disability benefits program for valuable employees . Employer paid long-term care insurance is often combined with retiree medical insurance . Among employers the trend is to reduce or eliminate retiree medical benefits to the rank and file employees . For highly compensated employee there is a trend towards cost sharing arrangements for medical expenses after retirement .
That is a great question , with a very simple answer - while the risks for both employees are the same , the cost of covering their losses is n't . To replace the salary of the higher paid employee will obviously cost more than the lesser paid employee . Workman 's comp and disability pay a percentage of your pay , so the higher priced guy costs more . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Are Life Insurance Gains ?
When money is taken out of an existing life insurance policy and the amount taken exceeds the total of premiums paid it is considered a gain and can be taxed as such . In such a situation the insured will often borrow the money from the policy . There may be additional tax considerations
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
That is an excellent question !! Many people become confused by this type of annuity because of it 's connection to the stock market . The annuity does have it 's performance linked to the performance of the market , but it does not involve any particular stock . Your annuity gains based upon the gains that the aggregate market gains , not ant particular stock . For example , your annuity bases its gains on the S&P 500 . If the S&P 500 rises from point a to point b , your annuity credits your fund with a promised gain . You have not purchased any stock , nor are you participating in the market . You are just `` gambling '' on its performance . Since there is no stock investment , it is not considered a security , unlike a variable annuity , which does invest in the market , and therefore is considered a security . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is an excellent question ! The investment gains within your Roth IRA are not subject to capital gains taxes . As long as your gains are contained within the IRA , you are n't subject to any taxes on those gains . That is one of the best reasons to have one . Your contributions are taxed before making them , so like life insurance , it is n't taxable coming out . There are rules about making qualified withdrawals that have to be followed to keep your withdrawals tax free during the first five years , but they only apply to the gains , not the contributions . -LRB- Those can be taken out at any time without penalty , other than loss of earnings potential . -RRB- Roth 's are excellent investment vehicles , particularly when considering the tax implications . Thanks for asking !
Depending on the type of policy , it can . With universal life policies , most use an interest rate applied to the cash accumulation account . With these plans , the gains from the paid interest rates are tax deferred . With traditional whole life policies sold by mutual companies -LRB- those who also pay dividends -RRB- the gains can be contributed to an interest bearing account . However , using this option does create a current taxable income on the gains the account has . So , not really the best option for a life insurance policy where the goal may be tax deferral on the gains .
I 'm going to keep this simple and generic as we can spend a lot of time reviewing this question . First , what is an annuity ? An annuity is simply a contract between you and an insurance company where they offer market like gains or guaranteed gains like in a CD over a length of time , usually anywhere from 3 to 15 years . A fixed annuity simply means the money is not invested in the market although growth may be tied to gains but you will not get 100 % of gain but you also will not see the losses either due to the downside guarantees . A variable annuity invests money in the market with all the risks associated to market investing . There usually are death benefit guarantees where if you die before taking money out , the initial amount of premium is returned to your heirs . Please contact a registered representative to get more details and a prospectus .
In some business scenarios , where the company is the owner and beneficiary of the policy , the death benefit proceeds could be subject to the alternative minimum tax as well as ordinary income tax . With married couples , the death benefit proceeds could be subject to estate taxation upon the second death . But in general death benefit proceeds go tax free to the beneficiaries . Cash values in a life insurance policy , while the insured is alive , could be taxable if the life insurance policy was classified as a modified endowment contract and was annuitized or policy loans of gain were taken . The gain in a non-modified endowment policy could also be taxed at ordinary income tax rates , if the policy lapsed with accumulated gain in the contract , receipt of any policy loans and any internal policy loans that exceed basis . However , if a non-modified endowment policy is kept in force for the life if the insured policy loans of gain and withdrawals of basis could be tax free . But always consult your tax and legal advisers before moving forward with any purchase of a life insurance policy .
That is an excellent question ! A mutual fund is a financial vehicle that takes a sum of your money , and then invests it into stocks and bonds that the fund managers choose . There may be gains , or losses , depending upon the choices , how well they perform , and the fees that you pay for the fund to be managed . An annuity is a contract with an insurance company where you basically give them a lump sum of cash , and they in turn promise you a given rate of return on that money , and a guaranteed period of time to pay you from it . You can have small gains , orlarge gains from an annuity , but can not lose anything , as they guarantee at the minimum what you gave them to fund the annuity . The insurance company invests the money that you give them , and they assume the risk of gains or losses . I hope that helps . If you would like more info , please contact me , ok ? Thanks for asking !
Annuities are always taxable when gain is withdrawn from the annuity unless the annuity is placed inside a Roth account . Annuities do defer taxes when no money is removed from the annuity , so if no withdrawal , the gain is not realized until it is withdrawn from the annuity . Annuities use the Last in Last out -LRB- LIFO -RRB- accounting rule , which means gain in the annuity must be withdrawn before basis is removed , unless the annuity is annuitized . For annuities with a cost basis -LRB- i.e. non tax deducted/qualified -RRB- annuitization uses a tax rule known as the exclusion ratio to make part of the income stream gain and part non-taxable basis .
An Index Annuity is a type of Fixed Deferred Annuity . It guarantees a minimum return , while allowing index-linked gains up to a specified yearly cap or `` limit '' . The index-linked gains are usually based on a yearly basis . The most common crediting method is the `` Annual Point to Point '' method ; this method credits the yearly gain -LRB- during the contract year -RRB- up to the specified cap . There are other Crediting Methods that calculate index movements on a monthly or even bi-annual basis . But it is important to remember that all index-linked gains are limited to the yearly or monthly cap ; this is the trade off for receiving a guaranteed minimum return .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
In Canada , you are taxed on the policy gain at surrender and certain other events that are considered deemed dispositions . These include borrowing in excess of the policy gain , a partial surrender and most transfers of ownership . Essentially the policy gain is calculated by subtracting from the cash value the total premiums paid after deducting the cost of insurance and any riders . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How is life insurance taxed ? Well , if you use life insurance just for a death benefit and the death benefit proceeds are paid directly to the beneficiaries , generally speaking it 's tax free . If you 're using life insurance as an income play , as long as you keep the contract enforced for the life of the policy insured , those proceeds , whether it 's withdrawals to basis or policy loans to gain , also will be tax free . But if you are able to go ahead and use a permanent product , a cash value permanent product and you actually surrender the contract or it lapsed and there was gain in the contract , you will pay ordinary income tax on that contract on all the gain of the policy . So it 's important whether you use it for indemnification , to know the rules of engagement on taxes as well as if you 're using it for income .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
Term life insurance does not have any cash value . The only way term insurance pays out is if the insured person dies . Then it will pay the face amount of the policy to the beneficiary . Therefore , it does not gain interest . Permanent insurance comes in variations of whole and universal life . Those policies do gain interest within the policy . However , some of this is offset by the cost of insurance , which is the cost of insuring your life . That is what separates life insurance from a savings account , and why tax benefits are given to life insurance .
When you withdraw money from a cash value life insurance policy you have created an event . If the amount that you have withdrawn , combined with those you have previously withdrawn from the same policy , exceeds the amount that you have paid for the policy , you have a gain and are subject to income tax on that gain . Please contact your life insurance company if you suspect that this might occur . The company reports this gain to the I.R.S. .
Assuming that the variable annuities are non-qualified , the distribution of gain will be taxed as ordinary income at your effective tax bracket and return of basis will be tax free at the end of distributions once the policy gains has been exhausted . If you annuitize for life time benefits , the basis is amortized to your life expectancy as a portion of your payment from the start of distribution called the exclusion ratio . During the accumulation period , policy gains are tax deferred .
Life insurance death benefit proceeds received by a beneficiary in most cases are income tax-free . This is a key feature of life insurance . Exceptions include business-owned life insurance issued , or materially modified , after August 17 , 2006 which may be taxable unless specific steps are taken during time of application and annually thereafter . Life insurance contracts with three parties involved may also have unexpected taxable implications . Ask a life insurance professional if these might apply . If the policy-owner accesses cash values via withdrawals of some of the cash value -LRB- after policy year 15 -RRB- , the amounts are income tax-free return of basis -LRB- premiums paid -RRB- in the contract . After that , the gain would be income taxable . Special tax rules exist for distributions in the first 15 policy years . If the policy-owner accesses cash values by taking a policy loan , the amounts would be income tax-free . As long as the policy is not lapsed prior to the net death benefit being paid , the policy loans are never taxed . If there is a large loan and the policy is allowed to lapse , income tax would be due that year on all of the gain in the contract . In the event of a full surrender of the policy for its cash value , there would be income tax to the extent of gain in the contract .
Non-qualified , tax deferred annuities are tax as ordinary income for all gain in the policy . This includes variable annuities as well . It does n't matter if gain is withdrawn , paid out over a time certain like 10 or 20 years or even annuitized for the life of the annuitant . The gain is taxable .
Cash value life insurance from a mutual company , can gain interest if elected , but in doing so loses some tax advantages by choosing other options . Putting dividends in an interest bearing account with the policy creates a tax liability on the gain those monies earn . The most common way to avoid interest taxable gains on a policy is to elect paid up additions .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Wellness Coaching ?
Does health insurance cover wellness coaching ? The new Affordable Care Act covers many wellness -LRB- preventive -RRB- items . But coaching ? Based on my 32 years as a broker , I do n't believe it is covered . It is always possible that if it is considered therapy or another type of needed treatment , it might be covered .
Does health insurance cover wellness coaching ? The new Affordable Care Act covers many wellness -LRB- preventive -RRB- items . But coaching ? Based on my 32 years as a broker , I do n't believe it is covered . It is always possible that if it is considered therapy or another type of needed treatment , it might be covered .
While I was in High School , I played sports . We had a great football and wrestling program . While I would like to believe the reason it was so great was because of yours truly ... That would be untrue ! Point being , it was great coaching that created a great team and great success . You can certainly ` create your own awesome retirement plan ' - but would n't it make sense to do so , with the help of great coaches ? I think so !
I am a proponent of higher education , but it has to make sense . There are colleges that offer bachelor degrees in insurance . However , from an agents stand point , the success rate , in my humble opinion , is not increased . I have been blessed in the insurance industry for 22 + years and have recruited , trained , coached and mentored well over 1,000 agents . I have worked with agents that barely graduated from high school to college grads to even a couple of PhDs , there education level had nothing to do with their success or failure at selling insurance . As David mentioned , very few of us wanted to grow up to be an insurance agent . The best way to be a successful insurance agent is to become licensed and find a great mentor and be patient and become a sponge to learn everything you can about this great industry .
Well , that is a great question ! As I think about it , I realize that I am 5 people rolled into one . -LRB- Perhaps that is why my wife keeps asking me Just who do you think you are ?! :-RRB- We are hunters . We love to go out and find people with whom we can do business . We are personal coaches . We help our clients clarify their values and set priorities . We are field underwriters . We prepare people for going through the formal application process . We are advocates . We fight tooth and nail to get an approval at the rate quoted , and to solve any and all problems that emerge along the way . We are family friends . Processing life insurance claims is hard on everybody . A death in the family is tough to deal with . We are there for the beneficiaries in any way they need - on top of delivering a check to them .
This is a delicious question because so many people are denied coverage . The irony here is that many of these declinations could have been approvals . How ? Here are the three reasons why people get declined for coverage : 1 -RRB- They applied with the wrong carrier . Different underwriters have different levels of expertise with regards to different underwriting risks . Some are strong with cardiac cases ; others are strong in respiratory cases ; others are strong with hobbies like piloting . If you present a certain risk with which an underwriter does not have a comfort level , he will either decline you , or slam you with extra premium . 2 -RRB- The broker did not represent the candidate sufficiently . Many times eligibility for coverage is up to debate . Problems can occur with regards to verbal disclosures ; medical records ; lab results ; and many other factors in underwriting . These problems can often be resolved if the broker has sufficient expertise , negotiating skills , and leverage with the carrier . If not , then the applicant could be declined unnecessarily . 3 -RRB- Deal-breakers . Sometimes , people just are not eligible for coverage . If you did cocaine yesterday , and want $ 2million of coverage today , you will be out of luck . If you have stage four cancer , unfortunately , you might end up with some burial insurance and nothing more . The good news here is that with the proper coaching from your broker , you could qualify for life insurance at a future point . The broker should be able to detail for you exactly what circumstances have to be in place to do so .
Harry Crosby , a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- agent , coach and trainer , has one of the best answers to this question that I know of . It 's called `` The Two Mistakes '' . In the interest of space , I have edited his take on this important question : There are really only two mistakes you can make with long-term care insurance . Mistake number one : You get one of these plans . It doesnt matter which one . You buy a plan , pay every year , live a long happy and healthy life , die in your sleep with a smile on your face and the money you paid in is gone . Right . The money you paid in is gone . Had you known that this would be the case , you would never have purchased a long-term carepolicy . Mistake number two : You stay self-insured , which is what you are doing right now . Then you -LRB- and possibly your spouse -RRB- need care . Not only do you pay for it yourself out-of-pocket , but the rest of the burden is placed on your family . Lets look at the two mistakes . Mistake number one is that you get this plan , and your premium is about $ 2,500 a year . You live another 30 years , and at age 85 you die in your sleep with a smile on your face never needing a day of care and thus never getting a dime out of the policy . You get to the pearly gates , they look at your file , and they laugh at you because you made a $ 75,000 mistake for having this policy and never needed it . By the way , that amount is less than one year of facility care in todays dollars . Now , mistake number two . You decide to not get this policy and pay the premium . Twenty years from now , when you are 75 , you need care for just two years . You pay for the care out-of-pocket . Based on past trends , the average cost of future care will be about $ 350,000 . If you have to make a mistake , which mistake has the least impact on your family : the first one or the second one ? That is why top financial advisors and the federal and state government encourage people like you and I to look into LTCI . It is just common sense .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
Well Fargo 's advisors sell annuities as agents . Well Fargo does not itself manufacture annuity products . So when you purchase an annuity through Well Fargo , Wells Fargo or their advisory group is acting as an agent just as any agent would when they sell you an annuity , and Well Fargo receives the commissions that would be paid to an agent .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Yes , you can generally have any number of health insurance plans you want . Several people have a primary and secondary health insurer . The secondary insurance typically covers health care costs that the primary insurance policy does not cover . If you do have two health insurance plans , you should be sure to make the health care provider well aware of this fact so they know to coordinate between the multiple insurers and bill accordingly .
Wells Fargo -LRB- the bank -RRB- does not offer/underwrite life insurance as they are a bank . They do , however , have an agreement with at least one life insurance company that underwrites policies that are solicited through Wells Fargo . Meaning , Wells Fargo makes money by passing on information of their new mortgagees to insurance companies and agencies as an extra revenue source . It also broadens their product offering . If you google `` wells fargo term life insurance '' and you read the fine print it will say the name of a life insurance company in there .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medigap plans cover the gaps in cost that Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover . Medicare Part A & Part B only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap Plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- all or a portion of that other 20 % , depending on which Medigap plan you have -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it limits the expenses a senior can be exposed to by creating a very predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , your Wellness visit should occur if youve had Part B for longer than 12 months . Prior to this visit , you would of had a Welcome to Medicare preventive visit during your first 12 months on Medicare . The Wellness visit is completed annually . The provider is supposed to ask you to complete a brief questionnaire , called a Health Risk Assessment to help develop a personalized prevention plan . Medicare covers many preventative services and it is during this Wellness visit that you can discuss which ones are right for you . If the doctor accepts Medicare assignment , you pay nothing for the yearly Wellness visit . If additional tests or services are completed during the same visit that are not covered under this benefit , it is possible that you will be responsible for paying co-insurance and the Part B deductible . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Happens If You Do n'T Have Long Term Care Insurance ?
Private long term care insurance protects your income and financial assets from being decimated as a result of long term care expenses . If you do not have this coverage , which shifts the risk to the insurance company , you retain the risk . In the event you need assistance with at least two of six of the activities of daily living , the costs can add up . Whether at home , in an assisted living facility or nursing home , the costs for care can easily exceed $ 250 per day with average stays of 3 years or more .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Why do n't more people do n't buy long term care insurance ? Well mainly the reason is they do n't see a need because they have n't really thought about it . Speaking plainly people either `` get '' long term care or they do n't . I ca n't talk someone into purchasing coverage , but usually people come to me seeking long term care . Usually it is because they recently had a family member in a care situation and they simply do n't want that to happen to them . So it is a matter of putting together a plan that is affordable and covers the needs they want .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
I ca n't think of a situation where it would n't be required . Your mortgage company has just lent you a bunch of money to buy a home . They need to be sure that , if something happens to the home , it will be restored to what it was before anything happened . They 're just protecting their investment . The bigger question is `` why would n't you want to insure your home ? '' . You just made a big commitment and have a lot of money on the line . If something happened to your home , what would you do ? Yes , premiums for homeowners insurance are high , but not as high as the repairs you 'd have to pay for if you did n't have insurance . Plus , it not only protects the house , but everything in the house . Most people do n't think they have a lot of money tied up in their `` things '' , but they 'd be astonished to find out what it would cost to replace it all .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
If you do not have an estate to protect then you may not need Long Term Care . If you can qualify for Medicaid or a Medicaid waiver program then you do not need long term care . If you do not mind spending down all you have worked for during your life to go on Medicaid then you do not need long term care . If you have an estate you want to pass to your heirs , loved ones you want to protect from the burdens of caring for you when you become sick and can no longer care for yourself then you do need long term care insurance . If you want choices on where you are cared for then you need long term care .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance If I Have Taken Drugs ?
If you have taken drugs over 10 years ago but have never had to have treatment or have not had any infractions due to drug use , your history of drug use may only affect your premium slightly , or possibly not at all . If your last drug use was more recent , you can still get simplified issue life insurance if you have not used drugs in the past two years . And finally , there is guaranteed issue life insurance for those who are currently using drugs .
Peggy is correct . I would also add the type of drug abused has a lot of barring on underwriting decisions . If you abused prescription drugs that are FDA regulated the underwriters are more forgiving on risk after 10 years . However , if you abused cocaine , heroine , meth , etc. these drugs are usually `` cut '' with unknown substance . This is viewed as a much higher risk by underwriters . The `` cut '' can cause more damage to the body than the actual drug . Therefore , in most cases these cases are declined from underwritten plans .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
Medicare may cover some cancer drugs taken by mouth IF the same drug is available in an injectable form or is a prodrug . Xeloda is included this list . However , you will typically see these drugs covered under a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan - you would need to check your plan 's formulary to see if this specific drug is covered and at what tier it would fall under . You may want to check with Medicare directly to verify if your specific scenario would fall under the Part B coverage guidelines or if you would need to refer to your prescription drug coverage -LRB- i.e. Part D plan or MAPD plan -RRB- .
It ultimately depends on what prescription drug plan you have . Not all drug plans are the same . The list of covered drugs -LRB- also known as a formulary for Medicare programs -RRB- will tell you whether your Cialis prescription will be covered . If it 's listed as a covered drug , then you would only pay your share of the expense -LRB- deductible , copay , and/or coinsurance , etc. -RRB- . If it 's not a covered drug , then you would be responsible for 100 % of the cost . It may simply be that the prescription drug plan you have does not cover this specific drug . \ At age 71 , I 'm assuming you 're on Medicare . If so , regardless of whether your drug coverage is under a Medicare Advantage plan or through a stand-alone Part D plan , you would not be able to make any changes to your drug coverage until the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15 - December 7 of each year -RRB- . During the annual enrollment period , you can evaluate your options to see which carrier 's plan will cover this prescription . If you 're covered under an employer plan , options may be limited , but if more than one option is available , I would recommend reviewing each of them to see which plan will be most suitable for your needs . If it 's an individual poilcy , I recommend contacting the agent who placed the covered for you -LRB- that person would be the servicing agent for the program -RRB- or call your insurance carrier directly to find out if it should be a covered drug under your plan . If you have a group policy , then you would need to either contact the carrier directly or your human resources department should be able to put you in contact with the appropriate person . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans do not cover drugs . They use to until a few years ago when Medigap plans E , H , I , and J were taken off of the marketplace due to changes in the Medicare laws . If you have a Medigap plan and want to have coverage for prescription drugs , you would need to secure a standalone Part D prescription drug plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Medicare may cover some cancer drugs taken by mouth IF the same drug is available in an injectable form or is a prodrug . Xeloda is included this list . However , you will typically see these drugs covered under a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan - you would need to check your plan 's formulary to see if this specific drug is covered and at what tier it would fall under .
This is very unusual but not unheard of and technically legal as I understand it . In my nearly 30 years of being associated with employer 's group health plans I have had many clients who require a drug screen as a condition of employment but I have never had one that charged a prospective employee to pay for it . Do they offer to reimburse you if you pass the drug screening ? Really a drug screen should only be the last step before you are hired or you are given a conditional offer of employment based upon passing the drug screen . With today 's technology $ 300 seems an excessive amount to be charged just for a drug screening , is there a credit check and criminal background check also included in this ? Traditionally such practices have been a cost of doing business for the employer -LRB- and these tests can be required of the employer if the have Federal or State contracts they have to comply with as part of their doing business with the government -RRB- and not passed onto a job applicant . Personally , I would look for employment elsewhere before I would pay a prospective employer for the `` privilege '' of getting a job offer . If they will pick your pocket up front like that I can only imagine what a delightful work environment they must provide .
That 's funny ... I DID FIND that medication `` covered '' by a Part D Plan ... in my state ... Here is what you need to do . Go to medicare dot gov. Then click on `` Find Health and drug plans . >> > Add your Zip code >> > I usually check both of the `` I do n't know '' buttons . Just gets you through faster >> > Type in your drug name & pick the dosage . The system will default to the most common dosage/quantity >> > I chose 3 plan in my area ... ONE of the 3 DOES cover the Rx . Tier 3 level . The other two said not on formulary >> > I then popped over to Costco . You can see the cost of many medications right from their website . Not all drugs . They only list like the most prescribed . It 's a GREAT tool for comparing prices . AAHHH . I see that it is cheaper to just walk in to Costco -LRB- or mail order or go to Sam 's / BJ 's or price compare with a local pharmacy -RRB- . SO THE ANSWER IS >> > Yes . There could be a Part D that `` covers '' Cialis . You have to look at plans in YOUR area . Yet , I would like to ask a different question . IS IT WORTH having a plan that `` covers '' Cialis ? Based on the math alone ... . NO . I would n't advise it . Looks like you can buy it cheaper without `` coverage '' AND why would you want the cost to get you closer to the donut hole ? If the Rx is `` covered '' , it counts ... putting you closer & closer to the gap . YIKES !! You might need the coverage for something lifesaving one day . Shop around & get a better deal .
Current drug addicts can get life insurance if the policy is a guaranteed issue policy . There is a minimum age for this type of coverage that is usually age 40 + and the policy will be graded during the first few years for all but accidental death . Drug addicts who are currently using drugs can also get accidental death coverage . This type of insurance will usually only pay the death benefit if death is caused by accidental death not related to drug use , and it will not pay for death due to natural causes of any kind . Drug addicts who have gone through treatment and have had a number of years pass since they used drugs can get simplified issue life insurance that may or may not be graded . If the drug treatment was long ago with no relapses , recovered drug addicts can even qualify for medically underwritten coverage .
If you are buying a life insurance policy that requires medical underwriting , it will test for certain illegal drugs , especially cocaine and marijuana . If you are purchasing a policy that not require an exam , no drug tests will be done . However , then the application will ask if you have taken illegal drugs withing a certain period of time .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Life Insurance companies must do a blood test for any amount over around $ 25,000 , although some groups allow up to $ 150,000 . The tests are to detect both legal and illegal drugs . If you are taking medications and do not disclose that , they will be found . This helps the carrier determine what your general state of health is . So assume that whatever the drug is you may be taking , it will be detected by the test . Even a week after you have taken that drug . Thank you . GARY LANE .
If you have taken drugs over 10 years ago but have never had to have treatment or have not had any infractions due to drug use , your history of drug use may only affect your premium slightly , or possibly not at all . If your last drug use was more recent , you can still get simplified issue life insurance if you have not used drugs in the past two years . And finally , there is guaranteed issue life insurance for those who are currently using drugs .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
Dead peasant life insurance policies are life insurance policies taken out by a business on all the employees working for that business . The beneficiary of those policies is the business . Sometimes the employees are not informed that a life insurance policy has been taken out on them . This type of policy is not common any more . Rather , most group life insurance taken out for employees allows them to choose their own beneficiaries . If there is a policy owned by the business , is it usually taken out on key employees so that the business can replace them in the event of their demise .
end question
start question
home-insurance
When Do I Need To Buy Home Insurance ?
If you are a homeowner you need homeowners insurance . If you are a first time buyer then escrow and the lender will make sure you have homeowners insurance in place at the close of the home sale . If you are already a homeowner then I recommend you maintain a homeowners policy . If your home is paid in full you do have the option of letting the policy go but I would advise against this unless you believe you can afford the replace your home in the event of a total loss .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Lets use the analogy of living in a home . You basically have two choices : to buy , or to rent . Suppose you rent . Why would you do that ? First of all , you dont have to put any money up . Nor do you have to pay any real estate taxes . Nor do you have to pay for any maintenance . Its basically a cheap way to put a roof over your head . But , you always have the option to buy . Suppose now you buy . Why would you do that ? Equity . You have something to show for your money . Your home attains a monetary value that can be exploited . Of course , it costs more . But you get more . And you still get a roof over your head . This model is useful for understanding life insurance . Term insurance is like renting a home . Its a pretty cheap way to get the coverage you need . No equity , no added value . But you can convert it to a permanent policy . Whole life equates to buying a home . You pay more , but you get more . There is cash available for you to use , in addition to the survivor benefit for your heirs - that roof over your head . Make sense ?
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
Do you buy running shoes for a marathon form Wal-Mart ???? Do you buy a 4 cylinder truck to pull a trailer that really demands a V8 ? My point is , `` WHO CARES who has the cheapest '' . Yes , there is a way to assess apples to apples when buying home insurance . Red vs. green apples . There are always some differences in policies . However , in my state , there is a vast difference in plans offered . You are buying something to guard your finances in the event of the loss of your home , valuables , or retirement -LRB- that 's called Liability Coverage folks -RRB- . BUY THE MOST you can reasonably afford . I did a quote once and for curiosity I raised our `` in house standard amount of liability '' form 300K to 500K -LRB- the next step up for that carrier -RRB- ... What did I see ???? A ONE DOLLAR difference ... Yes ... ONE dollar . $ 200,000 more in coverage for a buck . That does n't happen for everyone and every carrier . Yet it 's almost always less than $ 10 a month . WOW ... 200K more for $ 10 a month ... . You 'll pay the price if you buy on price . - gravy
There are two financially oriented universes : an insurance planning universe , and a financial planning universe . In the former , it never makes sense to buy term and those that live in that universe will give you an infinite number of reasons why - in the long run - it is a waste of your money . If you buy term , you will be called a `` termite '' . In the latter , term insurance - or permanent insurance - are viewed asfinancial vehicles that can be used to achieve a certain objective or several objectives at once , through leveraging : paying `` small '' dollars now for `` large '' dollars later . It 's called `` using the right tool for the job '' . Neither universe is right or wrong , although I would imagine you know which universe I come from . The point is to stay fixed on how much death benefit -LRB- coverage or face amount -RRB- you need and for how long . The way I see it , one needs term when they have a high need and a low budget , and a type of permanent insurance policy for when they eventually die . In other words , you need both . I recommend buying term in the higher amount that you need early in life -LRB- wife , kids , education , mortgage , etc. -RRB- for the period of time you are most likely to need it -LRB- 20-30 years -RRB- , but at the same time , buy a small face amount of permanent insurance to cover final expenses , projecting forward a nice , long lifetime and what it will probably cost to put you in a box , or reduce your mass through pyric methodolgies and put you in an urn . Allow for other final expenses , such as possible debt , medical expenses not covered by insurance , and a little `` transitional money '' for those you leave behind . That way , when your term runs out , you 'll have only the permanent plan to pay premium on , and , if you design it prudently , you might find that your final expense policy no longer needs any premium when your term runs out . You 'll need an experienced and knowledgeable agent from the appropriate universe to put this together for you so that it fits your budget . Final note : As has been appropriately mentioned in an answer above , be sure to purchase only `` fully convertible term '' for the reasons cited therein .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is There Life Insurance For People With HIV ?
The only type of life insurance available to people with HIV at this point in time is guaranteed issue life insurance . This type of coverage is graded , only provides small face amounts -LRB- usually under $ 25,000 -RRB- and usually has a minimum age requirement of 45 years . Hopefully this is one of those health conditions that life insurance will look at more leniently in the future as HIV treatments continue to improve .
It is very , very difficult to get coverage when you answer `` yes '' to the health questions on an insurance application on HIV . If you can find a guaranteed issue plan that doesnt ask the question , you can find coverage . Some of the guaranteed issue plans also ask so you would have to shop around . Dont expect high coverage , expect to pay higher premiums and it will probably be graded for the first 2 years -LRB- if you die your beneficiary would get their paid premiums returned as a death benefit -RRB- . Contact an Insurance professional for more details and a quote
There is a membership plan available that offers up to $ 100,000 for very minimal money . The only requirements are you must work at least 30 hours per week , live in the USA , and keep paying the membership dues . It is underwritten by TransAmerica . Contact me for more information or go to the website
Unfortunately , people with HIV have a very hard time getting life insurance . Even if they have had no symptoms and have lived for many years being HIV positive , they are put into the same category as those who have the final stage of HIV infection , which is AIDS . If age 40 or over , there are guaranteed issue policies that can be purchased by persons with HIV . Younger people might want to look to credit unions or other sources that offer low face amount policies with no health questions , as a perk for signing up .
I specialize in HIV Life Insurance and most of the people I have spoken to think it is always better to be tested anonymously when you get tested because if you test positive then the chances are it will end up in your MIB file forever . As far as a HIV test for Life Insurance if you know your positive then do n't waste your time on a company you know tests for HIV . It is not a requirement for every company . I actually offer a Group Life Insurance policy through a membership that comes with $ 10,000 in life insurance and you can buy-up to $ 100,000 in $ 10,000 increments . It is very affordable and the only requirement is that you work 30 hours or more a week and live in the USA and not in AK , MT , SD , UT VT , or WA CONTACT me for more info
People with HIV can get life insurance although you will fall into a guaranteed issue situation . Insurance companies are all about how long you are expected to live . Unfortunately HIV reduces the mortality . Most insurance companies will not underwrite these people . Companies that offer a guaranteed issue or perhaps a graded benefit will look at giving you some life insurance however the death benefit available is limited .
Unfortunately , the only type of private life insurance that HIV patients can get is guaranteed issue life insurance . Guaranteed Issue policies are not available at every age , so there are some people who are HIV positive who may not be able to obtain a life insurance policy unless under a group plan through their work .
The only type of life insurance available to people with HIV at this point in time is guaranteed issue life insurance . This type of coverage is graded , only provides small face amounts -LRB- usually under $ 25,000 -RRB- and usually has a minimum age requirement of 45 years . Hopefully this is one of those health conditions that life insurance will look at more leniently in the future as HIV treatments continue to improve .
Unfortunately , HIV positive people can not get life insurance unless it is a graded , guaranteed issue plan that asks no health questions . These plans usually have a minimum age requirement of at least age 40 and have a maximum face amount often under $ 25,000 . With the new treatments for AIDS , hopefully the life insurance industry will make it easier for HIV positive persons to get life insurance in the future .
If you take a policy that requires an exam , the blood test will include testing for HIV . If you apply for a simplified issue policy with health questions , the health questions will usually ask if you are HIV positive or have AIDS . The only type of policy that does not test for HIV , or ask about it , is guaranteed issue life insurance .
Yes , as part of the underwriting process one of the lab tests is for HIV . Depending on the state you are applying in , the acknowledgement of HIV testing may be in the wording just prior to the signature space . In other states , like mine , there also is a separate signed page that points out specifically that one of the lab tests will be for HIV . It also notes that you can place your MD there for receiving test results to go over with you and dozens of specialized clinics to help you .
Testing positive for HIV would very likely result in a decline for life insurance . As the medical advances for HIV and AIDS treatment advance , it could change how life insurance companies underwrite this risk . Understand that anything that affects a person 's expected life expectancy compared to the norm will determine the offer for life insurance .
Health insurance plans will cover non-experimental treatment for HIV , AIDS , and ARC . If you are currently HIV positive you may find it impossible to purchase individual health insurance . Employer group health insurance plans are required to accept you without regard to pre-existing conditions . If you do not have prior creditable coverage there may be a waiting period for pre-existing .
Yes , a positive result on an HiV test will effect your ability to purchase life insurance . At this time , I am not aware of any carrier that will underwrite anything more than a nomial face amount of coverage at a large price . In my state because of current insurance laws a positive result on an HIV test means a decline .
Unless you are purchasing a No Exam policy , the life insurance company will want to know if you are HIV positive . The oral swab test can test for Hepatitis and HIV in addition to marijuana , cocaine and other drug usage . The test also measures cotinine , a much better predictor of cigarette usage than nicotine , and better able to disprove protestations of secondhand smoke .
Surprised no one has answered this question . YES !!! HIV medications are covered under Medicare Part D Plans and MA-PD Medicare Advantage Plans that offer prescription coverage all bundled in one . Check with your plan administrator for specific coverage 's though . Anti-HIV medications will always be covered because they are medically necessary to stay alive .
This is designed to test for tobacco , drugs , and sexually transmitted disease such as HIV . A famous basketball player discovered he had HIV through an insurance exam . By doing blood and urine it helps the company putyou in the proper rate class . If you are clean this can be a benefit and save you money on your premium byhelpingyou qualifying for super-preferred rates .
The test has no baring on Life Insurance . Testing positive for HIV after a Life Insurance policy is in force has no affect on the policy . Once the policy is issued the company can not change it because your heath has changed . Testing positive before applying for coverage will be a decline with most companies but not all . Testing positive during an Insurance exam will be a decline or at best postponed till you are rechecked by your own doctor . Being HIV positive will result in higher premiums and restrictions on the amount of coverage . However , you can get coverage . It is very important that you are completely honest with your agent before any formal application is submitted . An experienced agent will do an underwriting pre qualification with a company prior to submitting the application .
A life insurance application is a form divided into sections . The first section asks your personal information , such as name , date of birth , address , etc. . The next section usually asks about the policy you are applying for - face amount , how you want to pay the premium , etc. . Then the application asks about your risk factors : whether you smoke , participate in dangerous hobbies , your health issues , etc. . If you are applying for a simplified or guaranteed issue policy , the questions about risk will be fewer or nonexistent . There will also be some supplemental forms for medically underwritten policies , such as the HIPAA and HIV forms which give your consent to be tested for HIV and for your medical records to be reviewed by the insurance company . Again , if you are applying for a nonmed policy , there is no need for medical exam . But for larger face amounts or very competitive pricing , this type of testing is usually required .
Great question ! High risk life insurance is a type of policy that is generally issued to people who have health conditions -LRB- like HIV -RRB- or occupations -LRB- firefighter , oil rig wildcat , for example -RRB- that are above the normal risk tolerance for the normal insurer . They might also be issued to people that are incarcerated . These policies will generally be more expensive , and will often have a period of time included where the death benefit may only be the premiums paid in , plus a little interest . They are designed to help those that ca n't find it anywhere else . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Animal Damage ?
If the animal in question is a domesticated animal then there may be coverage for damage by the animal . A non domesticated animal is almost certainly excluded from coverage 's . Refer to your policy or contact your local agent to further discuss since each policy can differ by each individual insurance company .
The best answer I can provide is maybe . It really depends upon what damage is done by the animal and if it is your animal -LRB- i.e. pet -RRB- or a wild animal . Your animal & physical damage to your home : more than likely not , unless your carrier offers an endorsement against owned pet damage . I personally have never heard of this type of coverage , but that does n't mean it can not be found in the surplus lines market . Your animal & physical damage to another person or another home : sometimes yes . I say sometimes because if you have a breed of animal that is notorious for attacking people or causing damage your homeowners insurance will exclude it . However , if you have a breed that is typically docile and it randomly attacks a person or damages another person 's property your liability coverage will take care of it . Wild animal : more than likely not . If it is a rodent/pest then there is more than likely an exclusion in your policy . However , this exclusion might be something you could buy back -LRB- i.e. get coverage for -RRB- so check your policy . If it is something not considered a rodent/pest then it is very doubtful you have any coverage . I hope this helps .
It depends upon what you mean by Animal Damage . Your insurance policy will not cover damage to your own property caused by your animal . That is not technically accidental . Your insurance might cover damage caused to your home/personal property caused by another animal . It will depend upon the type of homeowners policy you have and whether that damage is excluded by endorsement or not covered at all . If you are talking about animal damage to another person because of a bite , then that will be something covered by your homeowners liability UNLESS the dog has a known history of biting others . I hope this helps .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
In New York , one of the standard exclusions under the property coverages is something along the lines of ` animals , birds , and fish . ' If youown a valuable dog , a ` canine mortality ' policy would be appropriate to insure the value of the animal . There are also health insurance policies available for dogs . If you meant to ask ` Are dog bites/attacks and/or damage done by my dog covered underthe personal liabilityy section of a renters policy ? ' , the answer depends on a reading of your policy . Many carriers have a ` dog exclusion ' endorsement which voids liability for either all owned dogs or specific breeds . A competent agent or broker should -LRB- as a standard procedure -RRB- assess/survey your hazards and include questions to you about owned animals -LRB- especially dogs -RRB- as many carriers will not accept as new risks those individuals owning certain breeds of dogs . Always determine prior to purchase that the insurance policy you wish to purchase provides coverage for your exposures ; if the policy covers the liability exposure of the animals you own . If the policy application contains questions about animals , make sure they are answered completely and truthfully , you sign the application , and you retain a copy of the application -LRB- or anything else you sign - always and without fail -RRB- . If you can not obtain a copy , do not complete the transaction .
It is fair to say that about fifty-percent of all renters own one or more pets . So it is very common for renters policies to be issued to pet owners . These pets are not limited to dogs and cats , of course . The biggest issue is the type of animal and breed . Some are on insurance carriers ' excluded pets lists . Rather than have an effect on the rate charged , more often than not the carrier will refuse to write the policy if one of the excluded animals is involved . The key issue is injury liability to others , caused by bites . Renters insurance will protect if a lawsuit is brought , as a result of someone elses injury , including those caused by pets , up to the policy limits for both physical injury and property damage of others .
Yes . The companies that rent out their dwellings have landlord policies . Those policies usually only cover damage to the structure from outside sources and not from the tenants . If you 're responsible for a stray candle or a stove fire which burns the house , condominium , or apartment complex down , you 'll be sued to cover those damages . Renters insurance provides liability coverage for just that situation . That liability coverage also protects you if someone gets hurt over at your place , if someone sues you because they think you said something wrong , or even if your animal attacks them . Renters insurance is also the insurance that you would need should your personal property get stolen or damaged in a loss like fire . So yes , it is legal to require renters insurance in Arizona . The good news is that it 's not only a really good option to have , but it 's also extremely affordable . If you want , we can even draft up a quote for you . Please reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com . Thank you .
Full coverage means that your automobile is covered in the event of an accident or other covered peril . Collision covers your automobile in the event of a collision with a non animate object such as an automobile or other vehicle , or a tree or building . Comprehensive covers your automobile for anything other than a collision , such as an animal strike , hail damage , a tree limb falling on your auto , windshield damage , vandalism . or theft . Generally , these only cover up to the value of the vehicle depreciated for age .
There are two parts to this answer because there are two coverages in a tenants policy . Animals are normally not covered as personal property . If your pet dies in a house fire , there probably isnt any recovery . However , if your animal hurts someone other than a household member , there might be coverage if you are legally liable to pay damages . However , you should carefully check your policy as many exclude various breeds of animals and many also limit the amount of liability coverage in the event of an animal related incident .
If the animal in question is a domesticated animal then there may be coverage for damage by the animal . A non domesticated animal is almost certainly excluded from coverage 's . Refer to your policy or contact your local agent to further discuss since each policy can differ by each individual insurance company .
Yes , your Comprehensive coverage covers any animal strike , falling trees , rocks , vandalism , anything other than a collision . Since an animal is not considered an inanimate object , an animal strike is covered under the comprehensive portion of your auto policy . Collision covers a collision with trees , other auto 's or other vehicles , and other inanimate objects .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Renters insurance would not typically cover for any pet damage . This would typically be considered the renter 's responsibility or the owner of the animal responsibility . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage that is provided and any exclusions that there may be within the policy or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
There are two forms of physical damage coverage that may be included in your auto policy that protects against damage to your car . Collision is the more narrowly defined of the two , covering your car for damage that results from impact with another car , a stationary object or a human being . Comprehensive covers most everything else including damage from theft , fire , falling objects , impact with an animal etc. .
Each carrier has specific guidelines . There are some carriers that have animal liability excluded on your policy . I would contact your carrier or a local agent and they can discuss what each carrier that they have available and the coverage 's they offer . Some carriers will also cover damaged caused by the animal but not if the dog bites someone . Read through your policy and see if you see in the exclusion portion if that is covered .
Most companies have a prohibited dog list . If you have one of these dogs listed below most home insurance companies will either not write the policy or issue a notice of non-renewal if discovered . If you have an animal liability endorsement , the coverage more than likely will not cover any prohibitive dog claim . Animal liability or `` dog bite '' liability will cover your dog that is not on any prohibitive list and has no bite history . Take a look at the list from one of the companies we represent . Akitas American Bulldogs Beaucerons Caucasian Mountain Dogs Chow Chow Doberman Pinschers German Shephards Great Danes Pit Bulls Rottweilers Staffordshire Terriers Wolf Hybrids This not a general list for all homeowners insurance companies . Each company may have their own list of prohibitive dog breeds . If you own a dog , it is best you first check your policy to determine if your homeowners policy covers any animal liability claim and if so , what is the sublimit of liability ?
An auto isnurance policy is made up of several different coverages which cover a variety of things . Keep in mind insurance is also State specific , so the specific coverages that make up an auto policy can vary from state to state . In my state -LRB- TN -RRB- , the typical policy is made up of ; Liability - pays to the injuries or others subject to your policy limits Property Damage - Pays to fix damaged property of other subject to your policy limits Medical Payments - paid to you or your passengers subject to the policy limits Uninsured/underinsured motorist - covers you if another does n't have any or enough insurance subject to policy limits Comprehensive - subject tothe policydeductible , covers things like fire , theft , water , glass or collision with an animal . Collision - subject to a policy deductible covers damage to your car when the accident is your fault . There are other coverages like rental car expence , towing , etc. that can be added to a policy . The above is a very brief overview . Check out WEBSITELINK for a pretty indepth explanation of an auto insurance policy . It is also best to speak with a local independent agent in your area and ask them about speciifcs for your state and your personal needs .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Cover A Tens Unit ?
Medicare will cover a TENS unit , but under a specific set of circumstances . According to the Medicare guidelines,ATrans-cutaneousElectrical Nerve Stimulator -LRB- TENS -RRB- iscovered for the treatment of patients with chronic , intractable pain or acute post operative pain . Further documentation requires that medical records document the location , duration and etiology of the chronic pain . Durable medical equipment has very specific guidelines to be covered under Medicare . Make sure you check first or you could be paying a lot of money out of your own pocket . For more information on TENS please visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
Medicare will cover a TENS unit , but under a specific set of circumstances . According to the Medicare guidelines,ATrans-cutaneousElectrical Nerve Stimulator -LRB- TENS -RRB- iscovered for the treatment of patients with chronic , intractable pain or acute post operative pain . Further documentation requires that medical records document the location , duration and etiology of the chronic pain . Durable medical equipment has very specific guidelines to be covered under Medicare . Make sure you check first or you could be paying a lot of money out of your own pocket . For more information on TENS please visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
The way to calculate optional life insurance is to take the factor that fits your situation -LRB- e.g. female nonsmoker , age 50 -RRB- and multiply it times the number of units of life insurance you want . A unit is $ 1,000 of coverage . Sometimes the factor determines a monthly rate , sometimes it determines an annual rate . Let 's say your factor is for the monthly rate , and is $ 0.10 -LRB- ten cents per unit per month -RRB- . To buy $ 50,000 of optional life insurance , take $ 0.10 times 50 -LRB- the number of $ 1,000 units you are buying -RRB- . Your monthly premium for that $ 50,000 of life insurance is $ 5.00 . This will probably go up each year .
Some folks purchase temporary life insurance rather than whole life , either because they have a very temporary need , or feel they do not want to use life insurance as a financial tool . When they do that , they frequently purchase a policy that will last only for ten years , if they pay the premium each year , and do not want it to change . This is called ten year level term . After ten years , if they are alive , they will probably need to start over again and get level term , now at a higher rate , or whole life . With the product I have , New York Life offers a ten year level term , but also offers an annually renewal policy , which works out about the same over ten years . The hope is that and the expectation should be , that the policy holder decides during those ten years or earlier , to convert their term policy to a permanent whole life policy , which builds up cash value and can be borrowed against . Let 's talk . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 . Thank you .
There are several ways to qualify for Medicare . The most obvious is to reach age 65 and have worked ten years during which you paid the Medicare tax . You must reside in the United States or its territories . You can also qualify for Medicare if you are disabled and receiving benefits under Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You can also qualify if you have End Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- or Lou Gehrigs disease ALS . If you 're getting disability income from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board -LRB- RRB -RRB- , youre eligible for Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- and Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- starting the 25th month you get the benefits . In those cases your enrollment will be automatic . There are exceptions which may apply to you and you should consult with Medicare about your situation . There isnt coverage if you are outside the USA or are in jail or prison .
A ten year life insurance policy is a term policy for which the premium will stay the same for ten years . At the end of the ten years , the premium will increase a lot , or the policy will end . Most people choose to apply for a new policy when their ten year policy ends , but not all people can qualify for a new policy at an affordable price due to health conditions or due to being older .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
If the personal property stored in a storage unit is an emergency removal from the insured residence , it is fully covered for thirty days . If it is merely storage of excess items the coverage is limited to ten percent of the personal property limit stated in the policy .
If your personal property includes a bicycle , it will be covered under a renters policy . If the bicycle is stolen from your unit it will be covered to the property limit of the policy after satisfying the deductible . If you have a $ 400 bicycle and it is stolen , and if your policy has a $ 250 deductible , you can expect a settlement in the range of $ 150 . If the bicycle is stolen from the bicycle rack in front of the Biology building then the amount of coverage is reduced to about ten per cent of the personal property limit of the policy . Subject to that reduced limit the claim would be adjusted in the same manner .
According to LIMRA , 56 % of households in the United States had no individual life insurance in 2010 . According to survey results taken in Aug , 2013 , four in ten families said they would have trouble meeting their living expenses if a primary wage earner were to die . Yet , the vast majority of people surveyed overestimated how much life insurance costs , and therefore , felt they could not afford it .
A ten year term policy provides a level death benefit in exchange for a level premium for ten years . Some of these policies are renewable but at a considerably higher premium . Few of these policies result in a death claim , most expire and disappear . They provide appropriate coverage when the obligation they are designed to meet lasts ten years .
The annual premium for 10 year level term is one of the lowest premiums you can pay for life insurance . However , the coverage ends in ten years . There may be benefits written into the policy that will allow you to extend the term of coverage . However , that extension will be expensive . If you need a lot of coverage for ten years or less , and you will not need the coverage after ten years , then the 10 year term policy is your best buy .
The ten years before your retirement date and the ten years after is the critical time for retirement planning . Wherever you are in that time frame will normally allow you options . If you are ten years away from retirement start today to live on your retirement income and see how that feels . Put the difference between your current income and your retirement income into a Roth IRA . Make adjustments as necessary but get into the post retirement budgeting process as quickly as possible . Identify those skills and interests that you have that can generate additional income should that be necessary . During this period of time be particularly wary of changing investment strategies in an attempt to make up the short-fall . If you elect more aggressive strategies you could end up with an unacceptable loss .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
I guess a `` Unit '' of life insurance is a term that can have a number of different meanings . The answers given above here by Peggy and Tim , both saying that a `` unit '' is $ 1000 must be accurate , but in the policies I 've read where costs are being analyzed it clearly says , `` per $ 1000 '' etc. . In sales I 've never heard or read of someone referring to 100 units or 500 units of insurance when they mean a $ 100,000 or $ 500,000 policy . I 've always understood a `` unit '' of life insurance to mean a one Million dollar policy . A `` half Unit '' policy would then be a $ 500,000 policy and so on . So when an agent is talking to you about `` one Unit '' of life insurance I 'm relatively sure they mean a $ 1,000,000 policy . `` One Unit '' sounds like just a little thing whereas `` a Million Dollar '' policy sounds like quite a bit to most people !
A person can own as many Life Insurance policies as they desire if they qualify for the coverage and can pay for them . The biggest problem is that without proper counseling the policy may not fit the need that the person was purchasing the policy for . Many policies are put on the market to meet specific needs and because of the public knowledge a person may buy a policy that they thought meant one type of coverage when in actuality it was completely different coverage . Over my lifetime I have worked with persons who would buy term policies when in their mind they had mixed them up with policies which are paid up early , ie , ten pay life , etc. . I have met more than one individual who through the years had bought 10 year term thinking it was like ten pay life and that it would be paid up in ten years . I want to stress here that buying a Life Insurance policy without understanding all of its reasons for existence is like buying any auto with four wheels without knowing anything further . I would also like to point out that most Life Insurance policies have what is called a `` policy fee '' that is attached to the premium of the policy . What this means is that the company is charging fifty to sixty dollars per year for the administration of that policy and there is no coverage on that amount of the premium . I have had people want several smaller policies to avoid taking a medical . This also can be a mistake since most companies have discounts on the larger amounts of Life Insurance on an individual . In today 's life you can find an individual who has knowledge in all fields of finance . If that person is living up to the pledges made to become an agent they will educate the client and help them purchase the proper Life Insurance and investments without sales pressure . A good agent builds clients for a lifetime ! Allen D. `` Al '' Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author `` The Prophets Dollar '' second edition .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
Great question . Often clients are afraid to ask I think they believe is it expensive but actually its relatively inexpensive . Typically if you insure two vehicles with a company the discount you gain by having a second policy on your auto insurance will if not cover the cost of a renters policy it will be close ! So the average cost is 60-120 dollars a year . So for ten dollars or less you have coverage for your phone , computers , books , clothes , medications , cd 's , movies , art , guns or whatever else you own ! Ten dollars a month is very inexpensive , also these are covered anywhere in the world !
`` Life insurance per unit '' is the cost of life insurance per thousand dollars of coverage . Child Riders are priced per unit . E.g. a $ 10,000 child rider may cost $ 60 per year , or $ 6.00 per unit . Flat extras are also charged by unit . The insurance company may add on $ 7.50 per unit of life insurance for 3 years after having surgery for prostate cancer . For a $ 100,000 policy , that would add on $ 750 per year , but then the flat extra would drop off after three years and the policy would cost $ 750 less . You can also price your own policy if you know the cost of one unit of life insurance . E.g. . If you are buying a final expense policy that costs $ 50 per unit , a $ 10,000 policy will cost $ 500 per year .
Video Transcript : What is a unit of life insurance ? Generally , most people will buy their insurance , they 'll say , `` I need $ 1/2 million or $ 100,000 . '' Sometimes , you 'll look at children or spousal attachments . Instead of doing a term writers , some people buy their extra insurance for children and spouses based on unit . Those units could be as small as $ 2000 , $ 5000 , $ 10,000 in units , and they buy them in price tags . They 've already homogenized and made a standardized price tag for each one of these units . Those units then are attached to the policy and become part of the contract . In case something happens , those units would pay out according to the death benefit amount .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where Can I Compare Health Insurance Rates ?
You can compare health insurance rates at the lowest available prices through an experienced broker . Using myself as an example , with more than 32 years of experience , I am able to shop all of the major carriers in minutes , and also include any tax subsidies that you may qualify for to lower your rate . In specific areas , certain insurers may be a better `` buy . '' An experienced broker gives you unbiased comparisons and helps you apply for a policy .
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
Some things to look at when comparing Term Life Insurance policies are : 1 -RRB- Length of the term . Longer terms usually cost more , so if you are not comparing policies with the same term , you are not getting a valid comparison . 2 -RRB- Guarantees . If the premium is not guaranteed to stay the same for the entire term , you can not compare it to a policy that is guaranteed to stay the same for the entire term . 3 -RRB- Riders . You need to make sure each policy has the exact same riders -LRB- if any -RRB- to make an accurate comparison . 4 -RRB- Convertibility and/or Living Benefits . These add value to a policy , so keep that in mind if comparing a Term policy with these features to one that does not include them . 5 -RRB- Health Rating . One company may rate you Standard , while the other may rate you Preferred . You pretty much need to talk to an experienced agent to find your best health rating . But another factor is : 6 -RRB- Price . One company may charge you $ 100/mo for Standard , while another company may charge you $ 100/mo for Preferred . So it is important to look at price in addition to health rating . 7 -RRB- Agent . It never hurts to run your Term choices by an agent you can trust , and get their take on the comparisons . Life insurance can be complicated and agents should have the ethics to help you save money while getting the best features .
A lot of it depends on personal preference and what your concerns are . If you want to make sure it 's with a top-rated company who is financially strong and stable , you want to look at what their rating is -LRB- e.g. A.M. Best ratings : A , A + , and A + + indicate superior financial ratings -RRB- It can also be helpful to look into reviews that people say about the company - positive aspects , any major continuous issues with claims , etc. ? Another major comparative item to look at is , on average , how quickly the carrier pays claims . There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' health insurance plan . The health plan that 's going to offer you the lowest rates may not be the most suitable plan for you . Make sure to compare the benefits covered under the plan . I always recommend consulting with an experienced health insurance broker . We can compare health plans from multiple carriers to help determine which program is going to best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Supplements actually supplement both parts of Medicare - Part A and Part B. Deciding which is the best supplement for you depends on several factors - some of those are your health , your financial situation and the rates in your area . The plans are Federally-standardized , so all companies are required to offer the same coverage plans -LRB- in most states -RRB- . However , rates can vary considerably . Because the coverage is the same and rates vary , it is important to compare plans on the basis of rates - both the company 's current rates and track record of rate stability if you can obtain that . Strictly speaking about the coverage , Plan F is going to offer the most comprehensive coverage , paying both of the Medicare A & B deductibles and the Medicare coinsurance . However , when it comes to comparing the actual companies that offer Plan F , it is crucial to compare on the basis on current and -LRB- projected -RRB- future rates .
Whenever you are comparing advertised rates of fixed annuities , it is very important to know the details behind the advertised rate . There are a multitude of variables between different companies . Many companies offer `` bonus rates '' for new investors . These bonus rates look very attractive , but are easily misunderstood . Key questions to ask are : Does the advertised rate include a bonus ? If so , what are the details ? How long is the advertised rate locked in once you invest ? Is there a guaranteed minimum interest rate ? If so , what is it ? Is there a bail-out option if the earning rate drops significantly in the future ? What are the terms ? For the right person in the right situation a fixed annuity can be a very good investment . However properly comparing annuities is more involved than comparing simpler products such as CD 's .
Depending on your state and which carrier that you get and they type of coverage you need . In Montana the rates are not based off of your gender . Rates are determined by many things such as your driving history and prior insurance and they type of auto you drive . Also your credit can play a roll in ratings also . I have many 21yr old clients some pay as little as 58.00 a month to as high as 400 a month . You can also go to your state insurance commissioners office and many times they have a rate guide that will give you the average rate for each carrier . I recommend that you contact a local agent they should be able to compare rates for you . If you do not understand what insurance coverage 's are and what they mean an online quote from a carrier might not be the best option for you a well informed agent should be able to compare rates and explain the coverage 's and what you need . I know at our agency Best Rates Insurance Inc we run our office 24/7 to help our clients .
In order to effectively compare life insurance plans , you must compare `` apples to apples '' , as the saying goes . Comparing a 10 year Term premium to a 20 year Premium is not a valid comparison . You must compare 20 year Term to 20 year Term to know which has the best price . When comparing Permanent products , there are many more variables that enter into the price.Also , you must look at the guarantees , the riders , included features , and the predicted health rating of either Term or Permanent policies to make a valid comparison .
The cost of auto insurance on a 23-year-old will vary depending on where you live and the type of vehicle you are buying . Also , your driving record will impact the rate . Of course , if it is a newer vehicle , the rate would tend to be higher than compared to an older vehicle . Also , a married person will pay less than someone who is single . So ... how do you find out the cost ? As brokers , we research and compare rates from top-rated carriers so you get the best deal . Typically , the process only takes a few minutes , and applications can be handled online very easily .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
That is a really good question , but begs the question - compared to where ? There are probably a great many people here that would complain that their insurance is too expensive . Where are you comparing the price here to ? And if I misunderstood your question , and you are asking why insurance on American made cars is so cheap , maybe the answer lies in the sticker prices and repair costs of the foreign models . Thanks for asking !
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
When comparing all insurance policies , especially whole life policies premium rates are only one variable to consider . Engaging the services of an independent agent / broker would help you find the right policy at the right price . If you are comparing whole life and the policy is non-participating example you can compare premium and the guaranteed cash value . This type of policy does not share receive dividends -LRB- the divisible surplus -RRB- . If you are comparing are whole life participating policy , then it is eligible for dividends . In this case , you will need to look at a company 's financials . Dividends are of course are not guaranteed . Availability of riders that can be added and premium payment period should also be considered . Unfortunately , I can not answer your question specifically without more information . I suggest you work with an agent / broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If your family member is just being treated for high cholesterol , then the answer would be no . Family medical history in life insurance underwriting generally focuses on whether a parent or a sibling of the proposed insured has developed heart disease or cancer prior to the age of 60 . Heart disease refers to items such as coronary artery disease , the placement of stents , bypass surgery , pacemaker , heart valve transplant , and other heart conditions . High cholesterol would not require a yes response . When looking for coverage , it 's important to compare multiple carriers for the coverage . Your full medical history will determine the risk classification you can qualify for - the risk class determines what the rates will be for coverage . In addition , every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines , meaning that each carrier can assign a different risk class to the same medical profile - one carrier may consider standard where another one may consider preferred . Your height/weight profile , prescriptions you 're taking , current conditions under treatment , conditions treated in the last 10 + years , any tobacco usage , and other factors affect the risk classifications carriers will consider . Determining the availability for preferred rates for your program would be best discussed with an independent insurance agent who can review your medical history , evaluate the risk class considerations , and compare a variety of options for you to make sure you 're securing the coverage at the lowest possible cost . Depending on how old the existing policy is , whether it 's term or permanent insurance , and what the premium is on it , you may want to consider securing a new policy that totals what the coverage would be if kept separately . Especially if it 's term insurance , a new policy would allow you to secure a new term rate guarantee where as the existing policy has fewer years remaining . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can compare life insurance quotes by going to several different companies , or you can compare life insurance quotes by going to one website or agency that sells multiple companies . The advantage of doing your shopping in one place is that you will know you are comparing `` apples to apples '' . Life insurance has a dizzying amount of variables to consider , and every agent has their own idea as to what is important . When you compare quotes on a website quote engine , you are comparing the same plan against one another , although you still should visit with an agent to be sure that the one you select is one for which you actually qualify .
The best way to compare prices on Medigap policies is to speak with an independent Medigap insurance broker . Independent brokers can sell Medigap policies from just about every company that offers Medigap plans . Since all Medigap plans are standardized and the only difference is price , you can compare plan F 's from every company that offers it in your zip code to see which carrier will offer you the coverage at the lowest possible cost -LRB- same goes for comparing plan G 's , N 's , etc. -RRB- . I would also compare the prices of plan Fs and plan Gs because the benefits are identical except plan G has a deductible of $ 147 -LRB- the Medicare Part B deductible in 2014 and 2015 -RRB- . If the difference in price is more than $ 12.25 per month , plan G would be a better deal for you . If the difference in price is less than $ 12.25 per month , then plan F would be a better deal for you . I would be happy to help you with your Medigap coverage and compare Medigap plans and quotes from every company offering them to you in your area - our agency is licensed in over 35 states and over 50 insurance companies . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
An annuity is two things : 1 -RRB- It is a systematic way to accumulate money ; and 2 -RRB- It is a systematic way to distribute -LRB- pay out -RRB- money . When you evaluate the options , these two functions are primary to understanding what you are looking at with any annuity . I will confine my answer to helping set the table for you to be able to compare one annuity to another . As a method of systematically accumulating money in an account , you need to be at work but your money also needs to be at work . The interest rate paid on your growing fund accumulation is how your money is considered to be working for you so one of the most important things to compare would be the rate of interest to be paid on your accumulations . Ask and know if there is a minimum rate of return . Beware : Proposals can propose rates of interest to be paid that may never come true so understanding the minimum rate of interest helps . It may also help to compare the performance of the annuity in terms of interest rate paid over time . Good companies can provide you a historical log of the rates they have paid on their accounts . You should also understand what the penalties to the interest accumulation occur when your decide to move the money to another provider . These are referred to as surrender charges or early termination fees . Commonly there are surrender charges for five to seven years so you should ask and know how you will be treated if you decide to move your money into another direction . Also , ask what other charges your account may be subjected to during the life of the annuity prior to making any distribution choices . Years from now you will have choices as you decide how to turn your accumulated account into a stream of payments -LRB- or outright surrender -RRB- . If you choose to surrender the account , know and understand what types of surrender fees might apply . Do n't forget , you 'll probably face a sizable taxable event if you surrender the account for cash on the gain above basis in your account . Legitimate rollover of the funds can avoid the tax and penalties under most circumstances . Depending on the type of annuity , all the money may be subject to taxation and if you surrender prior to 591/2 years of age , there is a 10 % surtax collected by the government above and beyond all other tax calculations . Now , if you `` annuitize '' the account with the carrier handling your account , you are choosing to leave it with your annuity provider for the promise of a periodic stream of payments into the future . In most instances , once the account is annuitized , it can no longer be surrendered for cash . At this point you have selected a stream of payments for some period of time and based upon certain events in your life or your spouse , and based upon an assumed interest rate . These funds , as they are paid out , will also earn additional interest gains that are considered into the payout formula before determining the value of each monthly installment distributed to you from your account . This interest rate is usually fixed but modern variations do exist to have the interest rate move with market changes . Generally , the payout period is your lifetime , often with a minimum period of ten years . It can be longer if chosen . This would lower the monthly periodic installments because of the longer guarantee . You may also choose to have the annuity pay beyond your life and for the life of a spouse and this will further reduce the monthly payout because it is based upon a longer life expectancy of two lives . The topic of distribution is too involved to provide much meaningful help but this should help you spur a reasonable conversation about annuities and help you compare one to another .
That is like asking what kinds of fish will I catch today if I just throw my line into the water . Interest rates on annuities are very different not only from company to company but product to product . Few people purchase an annuity for their interest rates unless the rate is guaranteed for 5-10 year periods . People mainly buy annuities for the no risk guarantees of having lifetime income . If you are comparing interest rates for the long term , annuities will compete . If interest rates are compared for the short term , annuities are not appropriate vehicles because of the surrender charges .
Ten year term life insurance is life insurance that typically has the rate locked in for 10 years . Sometimes term policies are only guaranteed for the rate not to go up for part of the term . So do be sure , when you are comparing rates , to be sure that you are comparing policies that have premiums guaranteed not to increase for the entire term . It is a great temptation to buy ten year term life insurance because the premiums are so low compared to premiums for longer terms . However , if you need coverage longer than 10 years , it is usually a better idea to buy a policy with a longer term . Why ? Because , most likely , you are healthier now than you will be in 10 years . And at this time in history , life insurance rates are very low . So locking in historically low rates based on your current good health is almost certain to be a good deal for you for many years to come .
You can easily compare term life insurance quotes by going to a website that shows you quotes from multiple companies . If you pick a website with `` instant '' quotes , the quotes will come up comparing quotes from different companies , and you can then change variables to compare quotes on different policies within that company . Once you see a policy you are interested in , be sure to talk to someone at that agency , or communicate by email , so that you can be sure you qualify for that particular rate . No quote engine can cover every question , and you may find that there is an even lower price out there for you , or a policy that works better for your needs . But comparing quotes online is a good place to start .
end question
start question
annuities
What Types Of Annuities Are There ?
Annuities are categorized in several ways . There are immediate annuities in which you pay a lump sum and the annuity starts paying out almost immediately , and there are deferred annuities where you make periodic payments and then start receiving payments years down the road . There are fixed annuities that guarantee an interest rate , and variable annuities for which the return is based on the stock market . Annuities can combine several features to produce a contract that works best for your financial goals .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
This depends on what is happening with the annuity when someone dies and what type of annuity -LRB- owner or annuitant driven -RRB- we 're talking about . For an annuity that is not paying income and the owner is the annuitant -LRB- i.e. the type of contract wo n't matter -RRB- , the cash value of the annuity will be paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- in the contract . If the annuity have been annuitized -LRB- i.e. is paying an income stream -RRB- the chosen option will determine what happens . For life only annuity payments , the payments will stop and no further money will be paid out . For period certain annuities , the income will continue until the period certain has ended . For life with a refund -LRB- installment or lump sum cash -RRB- than the refund will pay the the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- until the cash value of the annuity has been paid out in full to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
There are many factors that go into determine what an annuity will payout per month . The primary factor is the type of annuity you have . Additionally , there are usually options associated with the payout of an annuity , so answering your question without more information is not possible . If you are considering an annuity payment , be sure to compare all of your options . Here are some general factors that go into determining annuity payments -LRB- not all apply to each type of annuity and payout option -RRB- : The amount put into the annuity The growth of the annuity over time The age of the person -LRB- s -RRB- at the time annuity payments begin The age of the spouse if a joint payout applies The length of time the payments are guaranteed to last
What happens to an annuity upon death depends on the type of annuity you have and the contractual stipulations . If you have an annuity that was set up to pay out for the rest of your life , there may be not benefit paid upon your death . Some Life Annuities will return what was paid in or pay for a guaranteed number of years . A Joint with Last Survivor Annuity will continue payments to the spouse . For annuities that will are set up to pay a fixed number of years , annuity payments will continue to the beneficiaries just as if they did before . If the annuity was not yet annuitized , the proceeds must be received by the beneficiaries within 5 years . Contact your agent or the company through which your annuity was secured to understand the specifics about your particular contract .
That is a great question ! There are a lot ! Simply put , there are two categories of annuities . One you plunk down your cash , and it immediately begins paying out your monthly payments , These are called `` immediate annuities '' . The other type takes your cash , and holds it , or `` defers '' the payments for a number of years before paying those monthly payouts . These are called `` deferred annuities '' . There are several different types of these , but again very simply , there are `` fixed annuities '' , that pay a set interest rate , there are `` indexed annuities '' , that pay interest rates that are based on the movements of a market , like the S&P 500 , or the Dow Jones . There are also `` variable annuities '' , that pay according to how well the investments within the annuity did -LRB- or did n't -RRB- do . That is a basic look at the types of annuities , I hope that helped . Please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
That is a great question ! Annuities can be a great part of a retirement plan , but they are n't suited for everyone , because of the type of investment that they are . Before an agent can legally sell you an annuity , they have to do a `` suitability analysis '' . In this analysis , we sit down and discuss your current financial status , your cash flow issues , and your tolerance for risk , among other things . If you are financially suited for the purchase of an annuity , it is often the risk tolerance that determines which type of annuity is best for you . If you have a very low tolerance , then a variable annuity would not be a suitable annuity for you , while a fixed annuity probably would be . If you had a moderate risk tolerance , but an aversion to losing money , the variable annuity again might not be suitable for you , but an indexed one might be . If you have a high risk tolerance , and like to play the market , and keep involved in the transactions , then this may be the annuity for you . I hope that answers your question , please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
When you say retirement annuity , I guess you are referring to an annuity that pays an income monthly ? With that being said , the annuity that you are referring to is called an immediate annuity . Immediate annuities come in many variations of length of income streams . Typically an annuity to fund retirement would be a life only with survivor benefits . Basically this annuity will pay a monthly income for as long as a Annuitant is alive and then either 100 % or as low as 50 % to a survivor , normally a spouse for the rest of their life . There are many different types of annuities however . One annuity in particular is an Indexed annuity with an income rider . This would be an alternative to the immediate annuity .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What If A Life Insurance Company Goes Bankrupt ?
Life insurance companies nearly always merge with another company , or are bought by another company , before they get to the point of bankruptcy . State regulators are very strict with life insurance companies to help ensure that policy owners are protected . If a life insurance company would go bankrupt , states have guaranty funds that can pay the death benefit up to a limit .
A life insurance company , operating in your state is regulated by at least two state departments of insurance . These agencies monitor the financial health of each insurance company that they admit to do business in their state . If a company appears to be in difficulty the commissioner in your state becomes very active in conserving the assets of the company to make sure that they can keep their promises . Most states have formal arrangements that obligate other companies to assist in helping a failing company keep their promises .
Premium taxes are generally never seen on a policy declaration page unless the carrier is a `` surplus lines '' insurance company.Surplus lines coverage is provided by a special agency type referred to as a `` surplus lines agent '' who acts as a wholesaler to retail agencies . The help non-admitted carriers manage their underwriting and administrative issues for the states where they except risk . The surplus lines agent deals with carriers who are not admitted to do business in a given state but they can also work with admitted carriers . The term `` admitted '' refers to the licensing process and a `` non-admitted '' carrier has not sought the approval of the state insurance department to provide insurance to residents and businesses of the state . When coverage is written by the non-admitted carrier , a tax is charged on the premium and fees charged by the surplus lines agency . That tax rate is 5 % in Ohio . The surplus lines agent then remits the tax to the state where the risk is located . That is a part of their services . And , in answering the final part of your question , usually surplus lines tax applies to business risk but can also apply to personal lines . By the way , a non-admitted carrier is not included in the protections of the carrier insolvency protections of state statute so this is important to keep in mind when doing business with non-admitted carriers . Not being an `` admitted '' carrier in a state is not an indication of the solvency of the carrier or its ability to pay claims but it is important to mention that the protections of the law in your state may not help if a non-admitted carrier goes bankrupt in the same way as you have protection -LRB- in many instances -RRB- when an admitted carrier goes bankrup .
Annuities , either fixed or variable can be a good choice for providing retirement income for some of us , depending on particular situations . The major security concern relative to annuities is the financial strength of the insurance company that you choose or have chosen . You often hear the term `` guaranteed income '' associated with annuity advertising and marketing . However , if the insurance company that holds your annuity money goes bankrupt , you could lose some or all of your hard-earned retirement money . Some States have funds that can help reimburse some of the many policyholder losses in such failure situations . Also , the Feds can step-in , as we found out several years ago but there is no guarantee that will happen . So , insurance company failure is a very real concern , particularly with regard to annuities , although bankruptcy not very likely with regard to the most financially secure companies . The bottom line is that you have to feel very comfortable that your annuity money will be there when and how you are scheduled to receive it . Stay with the strongest companies financially . Ask for documentation of financial strength and ask a lot of other questions . Be as comfortable as possible with the carrier who is going to be controlling your hard-earned money .
Long term disability insurance is the most undersold insurance product on the market . Statistically speaking over 50 % of hard working Americans are living pay check to paycheck . If any of them were to become sick or injured and could no longer work , it would bankrupt the family . Long term disability insures their most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . The minimum waiting period to receive disability through Social Security is 9 months if everything goes well and often it does not . Long term disability is more than a good idea for working Americans it is a must .
If you apply for Medigap coverage during your initial enrollment period -LRB- usually at age 65 -RRB- you can not be denied coverage . Also , there are specified guaranteed issue situations where a carrier can not deny your application . These situations include losing an Advantage plan , losing your employer group health insurance plan -LRB- past age 65 -RRB- or if your current Medigap carrier exits the market or goes bankrupt . Outside of specified guaranteed issue situations , you can buy a Medigap plan at any time subject to medical underwriting .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Life insurance companies nearly always merge with another company , or are bought by another company , before they get to the point of bankruptcy . State regulators are very strict with life insurance companies to help ensure that policy owners are protected . If a life insurance company would go bankrupt , states have guaranty funds that can pay the death benefit up to a limit .
An annuity is a contract between you -LRB- the annuitant -RRB- and the insurance company -RRB- . Fixed annuities are a type of annuity that has a defined , guaranteed payment structure . The annuitant agrees to pay the insurance company a single payment , or a series of payments , and the insurance company agrees to pay you a fixed amount -LRB- income -RRB- , starting immediately -LRB- an immediate annuity -RRB- or at a later date -LRB- a deferred annuity -RRB- , for a specified time period -LRB- this could be for 10 years , 15 , years , 20 years , for life , etc. -RRB- . You generally want to have the annuity through a financially sound company -LRB- e.g. `` A '' rated or higher by rating companies such as A.M. Best , Moody 's , etc. -RRB- . If you 're concerned about what would happen to your money if the annuity insurer went bankrupt , please be aware there are protections in place in case something like that happened . In each state , insurance companies are required to pay into a state-operated guaranty fund that , in short , acts like an insurance company for the insurance company . It can pay out funds to the beneficiaries of the annuities up to the funds specified maximum allowances . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The highest life insurance policy ever written was written in the spring of 2014 to a California billionaire . It was written for $ 201 million dollars . It was actually underwritten by 19 life insurance companies to share the massive risk . This policy is so large that had one life insurance carrier would have written the whole plan and had to pay the death claim it would have bankrupted the company . The owners name is withheld for privacy . the undisclosed premiums were said to be in the low single millions . Great question !
The best homeowners company is the one that stands behind you when you suffer a loss . The best policy is one that meets all or most of your obligations during a claim . Every company licensed to do business in a state is supervised by the state insurance commissioner . Additionally their ability pay claims is supervised by the commissioner in the state where they are incorporated . Insurance companies set their rates and their rates are approved by the state commissioner . These vary by company on the same piece of property . The savings you make by choosing the cheapest policy could be erased in a minute if you have a loss that is not covered . You could be bankrupted .
If you are sued it could bankrupt you . If a fire sweeps through your apartment , you could lose everything that you own . If your unit becomes uninhabitable because of a fire it might cost you more to find alternative living space . If your landlord requires that you have a renters policy . In the final analysis it is a matter of what could you lose .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
There are two answers because there are two major sections to the policy . You need to have the highest liability limit offered by the company . A lawsuit can bankrupt you ! The company will direct the amount of coverage that you need for a normal homeowners policy . Because they often guarantee replacement of the building they will require that you insure to value . There are calculators available to determine that amount . An agent can compute that for you .
Auto insurance rates ultimately reflect the experience that a company has . An insurance company can not be allowed to lose money because they will eventually go bankrupt and be unable to keep their promises . Insurance in the US is a state responsibility and it is the state commissioner that approves the rates and the way that the rate is determined . In my state , California , the electorate took over the matter of rating and greatly limited the factors that could be considered . Whoever approves rating plans in your province could provide specific information about the manner in which rates are determined .
There are two major sources for information about limits . The mortgage company is going to direct certain limits . In California the mortgage company can not ask for more coverage than what an estimator renders to replace the property and clean up the debris . The second piece of information is the replacement cost calculator . Most companies today require that the house be insured to full value because they are extending replacement cost coverage . The third place to look for limits is your agent . I always recommend that the customer purchase the highest possible limit of liability . A lawsuit can bankrupt you quickly . The fourth place is the value of jewelry , guns , collections and other items restricted in the policy . Most people are satisfied with the automatic limits for personal property but if there is the slightest apprehension select expanded coverage . There are many more issues , earthquake and flood coverage , water back up coverage , law and ordinance coverage but all these can be discussed with an agent .
In addition to the definition provided by Mr. McKelvy supplemental short term disability can be used as a secondary policy for other disability plans . Supplemental is defined as : `` added to furnish what is lacking or missing '' . For example , people working in states with mandated coverage may want to increase the level of monthly benefit , or extend the length of payment duration . Or if employers offer a long term disability policy it may come with a lengthy elimination period . Many workers may go bankrupt before benefit payments begin on a policy with a 180 day waiting period .
Medicare Part B is all the outpatient charges , the doctors , the lab work , the outpatient surgery , etc. . You may wan to pay all these costs out your abundance of cash flow but most of us would be bankrupted if we did not have Part B . When was the last time you had outpatient surgery and what did it cost . When I had cataract surgery it was done as outpatient and since most of the surgery today is done outpatient unless the procedure requires you being hospitalized for the minimal out of pocket expense Part B costs it is a good investment
A quick way to determine the amount of renters coverage that you need is to take a camera and photograph everything in the unit that belongs to you . Open a spread sheet and list everything in the pictures with the price to replace what is in the picture . Total the replacement prices and you have the amount of renters insurance that you need . There is another part of the policy and that is the liability section . I recommend that you take the highest limits available . A lawsuit can bankrupt you .
Insurance companies that issue annuities can go bankrupt . This is an extremely rare event given the regulatory overview that exists in the insurance industry , but it is possible . Insurers are required to hold , at a minimum , two times the amount of capital vs. the amount of anticipated claims they could incur in any given year . Any insurer who falls near or below this level is subject to serious regulatory oversight to correct and improve their capital position .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Voluntary Term Life Insurance ?
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is offered to employees who have some life insurance provided to them by their employers , and their employers are giving them the opportunity to purchase additional life insurance coverage at group rates . Employer provided life insurance is not taxable to $ 50,000 whereas voluntary life insurance purchased beyond that amount will be a taxable to the employee .
What is voluntary term life insurance ? Usually it is a program offered through your employer to provide employees with an opportunity to purchase life insurance through work and payroll deduction . In some cases , voluntary group life offers life coverage at a higher cost , but with fewer health questions and no lab testing . The thing to keep in mind when considering life insurance is the more questions they can ask , the cheaper the cost will be for a healthy person . That does n't mean Voluntary life is bad , it means you may find coverage cheaper elsewhere .
This sounds like something offered by an employer , is this correct ? If so , it just means you can opt-in for the coverage and you will pay the premium . It is typically less expensive per dollar amount of coverage purchased . This is because it is often times based on the group of employees and not one individual . There is usually a cap to the guaranteed issue amount , but some will allow you to purchase more with some additional individual underwriting .
Oftentimes , your employer will pay for you to receive a certain amount of life insurance , then give you the option to purchase more coverage beyond that amount . The amount that you pay for on your own is called `` voluntary life insurance '' . If your employer does not pay for any of your life insurance , the entire amount that you purchase would be voluntary life insurance .
As stated , voluntary Term is offered on group policies and is voluntary , meaning you do not have to take it . Term insurance means that it is only offered for a specific period . Never rely on voluntary term as your whole insurance package . This only covers you while you are employed . That is why it is called term insurance . Some contracts will allow you to convert it to a permanent policy if you leave your job but that would be at a much higher rate . Most however do not offer that option . Some individual health policies also offer voluntary term insurance . This covers you while you have that policy but you lose it if you change insurance companies . You are better off in most cases to purchase insurance on your own .
What is voluntary life insurance ? Voluntary life insurance is usually something you 'll find in the workplace offered through your employer 's HR office . The voluntary means it 's an optional benefit choice for an employee . Usually voluntary life is sold on a guaranteed basis with little to no underwriting . Again since the few questions , the higher the cost or the lower the benefit .
Employee life insurance usually refers to a group term life insurance plan provided as a benefit for employees of a company . But employee life insurance can also include voluntary plans and business life insurance policies such as those used in conjunction with a non-qualified deferred compensation agreement . In some cases the employer pays all or part of the premium . Voluntary life premiums are normally paid by the employee . Group term life plans and voluntary insurance allow the employee to name the beneficiary . Business life insurance plans usually have the employer as the beneficiary .
What is voluntary term life insurance ? Usually it is a program offered through your employer to provide employees with an opportunity to purchase life insurance through work and payroll deduction . In some cases , voluntary group life offers life coverage at a higher cost , but with fewer health questions and no lab testing . The thing to keep in mind when considering life insurance is the more questions they can ask , the cheaper the cost will be for a healthy person . That does n't mean Voluntary life is bad , it means you may find coverage cheaper elsewhere .
Voluntary term life is a group product where participation is not mandatory . An employee can choose to purchase voluntary life , usually through payroll deduction . Depending on the plan , voluntary can be a guaranteed issue or simple underwriting plan . Guaranteed Issue would just be signing up and paying the premium and Simplified Issue might involve answering a few questions . Either way , most will pay more in price for these plans . Simple rule of thumb with insurance , the fewer questions , the higher the cost . If you 're a fit person , in good shape and health , a voluntary payroll plan gives you some convenience , but not any cost savings .
Usually the term `` Voluntary '' life insurance refers to a policy which may be purchased through your place of employment . Generally `` Voluntary '' life insurance is purchased through a group contract made between your employer and the insurance company . `` Voluntary '' life insurance can be a very good purchase as some companies will relax their underwriting requirements for those who participate and some insurance companies will even offer guarenteed issue type policies for those employees that participate . One of the other benefits of these policies is that they may be able to have the premiums deducted from your pay check according to how you are paid -LRB- weekly , bi-weekly , monthly , etc -RRB- . Other than how they are purchased `` Voluntary '' life policies are the same as any other life policy that you can by , in that they allow you to own the policy and assign beneficiaries as you desire . In most cases , if you leave your employment you may continue your policy by paying the monthly premiums from your bank account as they come due . I would caution though , that you should talk to the insurance company representative , when they come to enroll the group or service the account , as some policies may have different rules than others .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is a provision of group life insurance , where the employee may purchase additional coverage beyond what the employer provides . Voluntary Term Life Insurance can also extend to the spouse or dependents of the employee . The employee is able to purchase the additional coverage at group rates .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is offered to employees who have some life insurance provided to them by their employers , and their employers are giving them the opportunity to purchase additional life insurance coverage at group rates . Employer provided life insurance is not taxable to $ 50,000 whereas voluntary life insurance purchased beyond that amount will be a taxable to the employee .
Technically there are n't voluntary health insurance plans but there are voluntary insurance plans that are designed to supplement your existing health insurance plan . Voluntary benefit plans are one of the few growth areas in the health insurance market space and we are seeing new products being introduced and new insurance companies entering this arena on a regular basis these days . Generally , when people are talking about supplementary health plans they are referring to insurance policies that address specific issues such as ; 1 -RRB- Accident insurance - makes a payment to the policyholder when the experience a covered accident like falling and breaking your arm . 2 -RRB- Hospital Indemnity - these policies usually pay a fixed dollar amount per day or per admission for a hospitalization . These policies may also provide fixed dollar benefits for a certain number of doctor 's office visits , urgent care/minor medial or emergency room visits . 3 -RRB- Critical Illness - these policies pay a fixed amount upon the diagnosis of certain specified illnesses such as heart attacks & strokes , organ transplants , cancer , kidney failure . The illnesses covered and the benefit amount will vary from one supplementary insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . 4 -RRB- Cancer - these policies specifically address the diagnosis and treatment of various types of cancer . 5 -RRB- GAP Plans - plans designed to cover the financial exposure of having a high deductible health insurance plan . There are other variations on the theme and , as stated earlier , this is an area where new products are constantly being introduced . While this trend has been going on for a while , it has certainly been accelerated with passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- and the need to address the movement towards higher deductible plans that shift more cost onto the insured person .
Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is a group disability insurance plan offered to employees at group rates . It is usually provided through payroll deductions . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance will pay a portion of the employee 's salary to them in cash if the employee is disabled due to illness or injury .
Oftentimes , your employer will pay for you to receive a certain amount of life insurance , then give you the option to purchase more coverage beyond that amount . The amount that you pay for on your own is called `` voluntary life insurance '' . If your employer does not pay for any of your life insurance , the entire amount that you purchase would be voluntary life insurance .
What is voluntary short term disability insurance ? Probably something offered through payroll deduction by your employer to provide extra income protection for their employees . STDI is paycheck protection in case of illness or off the clock injury that would n't be covered by worker 's comp . This is for those broken legs skiing or sliding into second . Those weeks of chemo when you 're too sick to work . Voluntary means it is up to you how valuable this coverage is .
Voluntary life insurance is life insurance offered at the place employment that employees -LRB- or employees ' family members -RRB- purchase out of their own pockets . The premiums for voluntary life insurance are not paid by the employer . A certain amount of coverage is guaranteed issue for the employee ; beyond that amount health questions must be answered . Family members usually need to qualify medically .
Whether Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is worth it to you depends on whether you can survive at least 5 months without your salary , or would be willing to work at a job you can do vs a job you were trained for . Both of these must occur before being able to get Social Security Disability . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can pay approximately 60 % of your salary while recovering from a long illness of slow healing injury until you can get your old type of job back . That is worth it , to most people .
what is a voluntary disability plan ? These are plans offered through your employer that can very much be worthwhile to the employees of a company . Underwriting is usually lighter , cost is competitive and for the more blue collar occupations , a voluntary group disability plan is a great idea as it is very difficult to get disability on your own with a blue collar occupation .
Voluntary Life Insurance is offered by employers . It is group coverage available to the employees and their families that they can purchase on a voluntary basis , above the amount that their employer provides for them . For tax purposes , any amount of group life insurance coverage above $ 50,000 is a taxable benefit .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Voluntary AD&D Life Insurance ?
That is a great question ! AD&D , or Accidental Death & Dismemberment is a type of policy that covers a very specific type of injury and death . Many people will purchase it , thinking that it will provide adequate insurance in the event of one 's death . And it will , IF the death is the result of an accident . If it has to do with a sickness , disease or health issue like a stroke or heart attack , it provides no coverage at all , in nearly every case . It is a great , low cost way to protect against disability due to an accidental injury , and to supplement life insurance coverage , but I absolutely do not recommend it as a stand alone policy for life insurance . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to set aside some time to talk to you privately about this . Thank you for asking !
Voluntary AD&D Insurance is Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance that you can purchase through your place of work at group rates , if you wish to do so . It would pay for death or loss of limbs that occurred as the results of an accident . It would not pay if death or dismemberment was due to illness .
Part D Medicare went into effect on Jan 1 , 2006 . The Voluntary Prescription Drug Program was added to the Social Security Act by a ruling called The Medicare Prescription Drug , Improvement , andModernization Act -LRB- MMA -RRB- of 2003 . It allows persons enrolled in Part A and B Medicare to enroll in Part D for prescription drug benefits .
Voluntary AD&D Insurance is Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance that you can purchase through your place of work at group rates , if you wish to do so . It would pay for death or loss of limbs that occurred as the results of an accident . It would not pay if death or dismemberment was due to illness .
AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . While AD&D can be a rider that pays extra if the insured person dies from accidental death , some policies are stand alone AD&D policies . These AD&D policies that are not connected to a life insurance policy ONLY pay if the insured person dies from accidental death . I.e. they will not pay anything if death is due to illness or old age . So be very careful that you know what type of policy you are getting if you see AD&D in the description .
What is voluntary life insurance ? Voluntary life insurance is usually something you 'll find in the workplace offered through your employer 's HR office . The voluntary means it 's an optional benefit choice for an employee . Usually voluntary life is sold on a guaranteed basis with little to no underwriting . Again since the few questions , the higher the cost or the lower the benefit .
What is voluntary term life insurance ? Usually it is a program offered through your employer to provide employees with an opportunity to purchase life insurance through work and payroll deduction . In some cases , voluntary group life offers life coverage at a higher cost , but with fewer health questions and no lab testing . The thing to keep in mind when considering life insurance is the more questions they can ask , the cheaper the cost will be for a healthy person . That does n't mean Voluntary life is bad , it means you may find coverage cheaper elsewhere .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Usually the term `` Voluntary '' life insurance refers to a policy which may be purchased through your place of employment . Generally `` Voluntary '' life insurance is purchased through a group contract made between your employer and the insurance company . `` Voluntary '' life insurance can be a very good purchase as some companies will relax their underwriting requirements for those who participate and some insurance companies will even offer guarenteed issue type policies for those employees that participate . One of the other benefits of these policies is that they may be able to have the premiums deducted from your pay check according to how you are paid -LRB- weekly , bi-weekly , monthly , etc -RRB- . Other than how they are purchased `` Voluntary '' life policies are the same as any other life policy that you can by , in that they allow you to own the policy and assign beneficiaries as you desire . In most cases , if you leave your employment you may continue your policy by paying the monthly premiums from your bank account as they come due . I would caution though , that you should talk to the insurance company representative , when they come to enroll the group or service the account , as some policies may have different rules than others .
Employee life insurance usually refers to a group term life insurance plan provided as a benefit for employees of a company . But employee life insurance can also include voluntary plans and business life insurance policies such as those used in conjunction with a non-qualified deferred compensation agreement . In some cases the employer pays all or part of the premium . Voluntary life premiums are normally paid by the employee . Group term life plans and voluntary insurance allow the employee to name the beneficiary . Business life insurance plans usually have the employer as the beneficiary .
Voluntary term life is a group product where participation is not mandatory . An employee can choose to purchase voluntary life , usually through payroll deduction . Depending on the plan , voluntary can be a guaranteed issue or simple underwriting plan . Guaranteed Issue would just be signing up and paying the premium and Simplified Issue might involve answering a few questions . Either way , most will pay more in price for these plans . Simple rule of thumb with insurance , the fewer questions , the higher the cost . If you 're a fit person , in good shape and health , a voluntary payroll plan gives you some convenience , but not any cost savings .
As stated , voluntary Term is offered on group policies and is voluntary , meaning you do not have to take it . Term insurance means that it is only offered for a specific period . Never rely on voluntary term as your whole insurance package . This only covers you while you are employed . That is why it is called term insurance . Some contracts will allow you to convert it to a permanent policy if you leave your job but that would be at a much higher rate . Most however do not offer that option . Some individual health policies also offer voluntary term insurance . This covers you while you have that policy but you lose it if you change insurance companies . You are better off in most cases to purchase insurance on your own .
No , D & D is in addition to accidental insurance . The full name is AD&D , which stands for accidental death and dismemberment . Some life insurance policies allow you to add an AD&D rider , which pays extra if you die by accident . But a standalone AD&D policy only pays for death or dismemberment caused by an accident .
That is a great question ! I think that there are a lot of people who are confused about AD&D policies and life insurance . I think that often people assume that the AD&D policy is a cheaper form of life insurance , and therefore can `` save '' by purchasing one of them instead of the more expensive life policy . That is sadly not the truth . An AD&D policy will indeed pay if you pass away , but ONLY if your death falls within the very limited definition of `` Accidental '' as the insurer defines it . If you have a heart attack or stroke the policy wo n't pay - they are n't `` accidents '' . If you have a reaction to a spider bite , it 's not an `` accident '' . There are far fewer people who die from accidental causes than from natural causes , so the coverage offered in most cases is paid for , and uncollected . A life insurance policy will pay no matter what the cause , so is much more sure to pay . An AD&D policy is a cheap way to supplement your coverage , and is a good thing if you work in a hazardous job , but please do n't use it for primary coverage , okay ? Thanks for asking !
They are two different policies . An AD , D policy only covers accidental death and dismemberment . A life insurance policy will pay a death benefit regardless of the cause of death unless specifically excluded . Since ost people do not die as a result of an accident , AD&D policy premiums are far lower than life insurance premiums . An AD&D rider can be added to most life insurance policies .
I believe you 're referring to AD&D policies -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- . Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
Technically there are n't voluntary health insurance plans but there are voluntary insurance plans that are designed to supplement your existing health insurance plan . Voluntary benefit plans are one of the few growth areas in the health insurance market space and we are seeing new products being introduced and new insurance companies entering this arena on a regular basis these days . Generally , when people are talking about supplementary health plans they are referring to insurance policies that address specific issues such as ; 1 -RRB- Accident insurance - makes a payment to the policyholder when the experience a covered accident like falling and breaking your arm . 2 -RRB- Hospital Indemnity - these policies usually pay a fixed dollar amount per day or per admission for a hospitalization . These policies may also provide fixed dollar benefits for a certain number of doctor 's office visits , urgent care/minor medial or emergency room visits . 3 -RRB- Critical Illness - these policies pay a fixed amount upon the diagnosis of certain specified illnesses such as heart attacks & strokes , organ transplants , cancer , kidney failure . The illnesses covered and the benefit amount will vary from one supplementary insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . 4 -RRB- Cancer - these policies specifically address the diagnosis and treatment of various types of cancer . 5 -RRB- GAP Plans - plans designed to cover the financial exposure of having a high deductible health insurance plan . There are other variations on the theme and , as stated earlier , this is an area where new products are constantly being introduced . While this trend has been going on for a while , it has certainly been accelerated with passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- and the need to address the movement towards higher deductible plans that shift more cost onto the insured person .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is a provision of group life insurance , where the employee may purchase additional coverage beyond what the employer provides . Voluntary Term Life Insurance can also extend to the spouse or dependents of the employee . The employee is able to purchase the additional coverage at group rates .
No , AD&D is not the same as Life Insurance . Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance only pays if death is cause by an accident , or if a limb is lost due to an accident . It will not pay if a person dies from illness or old age . Even if the accident is cause by illness -LRB- e.g. getting in a fatal car accident while having a heart attack -RRB- , an AD&D policy will generally not pay the death benefit . Life insurance pays for death cause by illness or by accident . Since most death occurs by natural causes , more death benefits are paid , and the policy has a higher premium than AD&D . But the chance of having a permanent Life Insurance policy pay out is nearly 100 % , where the chance of ever collecting on an ADD&D policy is very low .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is offered to employees who have some life insurance provided to them by their employers , and their employers are giving them the opportunity to purchase additional life insurance coverage at group rates . Employer provided life insurance is not taxable to $ 50,000 whereas voluntary life insurance purchased beyond that amount will be a taxable to the employee .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Can I Join A Group Health Insurance Plan ?
You would need to get employment with a company or organization that offers group health insurance to its employees . Group health insurance is almost always associated with a person 's place of employment , hence the term `` group insurance '' . While they are increasingly rare , there are some association groups that offer group health insurance to their members so this might be another possible access point to group coverage .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
When you are changing employers , you will be forced off of your group health insurance through your old employer . You will then have several options : 1 -RRB- Go on COBRA - you will be required to pay 102 % of the health insurance premium . Your employer usually paid for a portion of the premium so you will now be paying your portion , your employer 's portion , plus the 2 % overage . Please note , you can only stay on COBRA up to 18 months . 2 -RRB- You will have a qualifying event for a special enrollment period to buy a new individual health insurance policy . Under this scenario , the ACA grants you 2 months from your group coverage termination date to buy an individual plan . 3 -RRB- Join your new employer 's group health insurance plan . Please note , as many employers require a term period of employment before you can go on their group plan , you may want to consider going on COBRA or buying an individual plan -LRB- traditional coverage or a short term health plan -RRB- as an interim measure . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What constitutes a group for health insurance ? It may vary from state to state as to what defines a group . Usually what is n't considered a `` group '' are people joining together for the primary purose of obtaining insurance . Since states are involved in the process , I will cite mine . In my state a `` group '' can go down to 1 person . Yep , a group of one . That said , in order to get covered , the group must show that it is a group for tax purposes and the individual must dervive 75 % of their income from the business .
The Patient Portability and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- commonly known as Obamacare is not a law that you have to have health insurance . It does require insurance companies to allow you to join an insurance plan regardless of your past health history . This would be extremely expensive for the insurance companies if only sick people joined the plans and healthy people did not . Because of this , a tax was set up to encourage everyone to join a plan . If you do not sign up for a health plan by March 31 , then you will owe a tax on your income tax next year equal to 1 % of your income or $ 95 dollars , whichever is more . More importantly though , if you do not sign up for health insurance , you wo n't have health insurance . Even the healthiest person could contract an illness or injury and need medical care . With medical expenses getting higher every year , paying a few hundred dollars each month to ensure that you wo n't have to pay thousands unexpectedly is a good trade off . The deadline is approaching quickly , so please contact a local broker and sign up for health insurance .
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How much disability insurance can you buy ? Well , here 's a secret that not many people know about . Normally , if you have group insurance and individual disabiliy insurance , it 's a combination between the two till you hit 70 % of your income.So if your group covers 60 % of your income , your individual will top out at 10 % . Now , if you have no group disability in place when you purchase individual , you can get up to 70 % in income covered . Then if you join a group plan , the two combine and can push the total well over 100 % of your income . So if you know kids finishing college or advanced schooling , get them to consider disability now ! before they go to work .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
You can be on your parents ' health insurance plan until age 26 . After that , you would be required to secure your own individual health plan . You do have the option of securing an individual health plan prior to 26 , you are not required to stay on it until you 've reached the age limit . Many young individuals entering the work force after college generally secure their own health plan or join a group health plan through their employer . If you would like assistance with finding a health plan that best serves your needs , send me a private message . You can also visit my website , TermInsuranceBrokers.com , to review plan information and run free instant quotes from many of the top major medical companies .
Having life insurance on the job is better than having nothing , you should have a personal policy as well ; why ? Your job , if you ever left , fired , laid off , quit , retire , no more group life insurance . I say always elect to join a group work policy because it 's so cheap . I tell all my clients this . -LRB- At work your job owns your policy -RRB- Again ; therefore you should have your own policy as well . Young and healthy is the best time to get life insurance you are rated based on your health and age and some other factors . Life insurance is not something you can get when ever you feel like it , it 's like applying for a credit card either your approved as applied for , approved at a higher rate or your insurance is decline . If your health is not so great then a group policy of course would be great for you .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
In the situation you 've described , no it would not make financial sense to carry two policies . Both are group plans and both restrict total payouts . You may have a cap of 70 % of your income or even 80 % which would allow for some additional coverage , but honestly it may prove expensive to do it this way . A situation where you could maximize your coverage is purchasing individual coverage prior to joining a group plan . There is no offset in place then and there is a potential to cover 100 % of your income . Individual first , group second . That 's the only way that works .
The major health insurance options in Tennessee are Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Tennessee , AETNA , Assurant Health/John Alden , CIGNA , Humana , StarMark and United Healthcare . These are the major players in both the group and individual health insurance markets . For 2014 they were joined by the Tennessee Health Co-op which is an organization created under a grant from the Federal government to provide an additional option in the government health insurance marketplace . There are a couple of third party administered health insurance products whose policies may be underwritten by Nippon Life or some other insurance company but they represent a very small segment of the marketplace .
How to get short term disability coverage ? Well , you may first need to check with your employer 's HR and see if there is a group plan you can join . If your employer does n't provide short term disability coverage , they may allow for voluntary disability plans to be purchased via payroll deduction . You can also find individual disability and set it up to work like a short term plan . However , with individual the best usually you can do is 30 days wait for illness and possibly a week or two for accidents .
Medicare Part D became effective on January 1 , 2006 . It is available to persons enrolled in Medicare Part A and B for prescription drug payment assistance , by joining a PDP -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . Or you can join a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- MA -RRB- that covers services and drugs in one plan .
Monumental Life Insurance Company joined with Life Investors Financial Group , Inc , to form Transamerica Agency Network , Inc , in 2011 . Monumental Life Insurance Company was founded in 1858 . The Aegon USA Group , of which Monumental Life is now a part , was rated A + by AM Best recently . To compare Monumental Life insurance quotes from those from other companies , visit a website with that offers instant quotes .
Everything the guys said above is spot on ... . Check to make sure you have all your discounts . Also , ask about coverage you do n't need . Most home policies have coverage for `` other structures '' . This could be a detached garage , storage building , or a car port . If you have ZERO unattached structures on your property , ask that to be zeroed out !!! It 's not a lot of savings ... yet I 've seen $ 20 - $ 200 a year saved . DO NOT try to save by reducing your liability coverage . If money is tight now , think of how bad it will be if you are raked over the coals by an ambulance chasing lawyer !! Last I want to address the my rate statement . Yes , that is the amount you are paying each month . Sadly , most customers -LRB- just shy of ALL -RRB- come to me with no real idea of how insurance works . Think of it as OUR insurance . You are in a pool with thousands of others . As people keep jumping in the pool and splashing water out , the water must be replaced . Well , its not water its money instead of water that needs to be replenished . So if your neighbor does a cannon ball of a claim , say a fire , A LOT has to be replaced . Yes , the neighbors rate radically goes up . Yet everyone in the pool is sharing the overall risk in an area . Your rate will go up dues to inflation and because the pool needs to be replenished . SOMETIMES there is just too much crud in the pool . YOU CAN look into joining a new group of insureds that are in a cleaner pool . SHOP AROUND . If you have a question , reach out ! - gravy
If youre signing up with a Part D plan for the first time , you may do so in one of three different enrollment periods , depending on your circumstances : The initial enrollment period - If youre not yet in Medicare and have no other drug coverage thats creditable -LRB- considered as good as Medicares -RRB- , you can join a drug plan at any time during your seven-month initial Medicare enrollment period . This lasts from three months before to three months after the month you turn 65 -LRB- or , if youre younger with disabilities , the month you receive your 25th Social Security disability payment -RRB- . You can also use this IEP if you turned 65 while living abroad or in prison . It lasts from three months before to three months after the month of your return or release . The special enrollment period - Youre entitled to an SEP in certain circumstancesfor example , if you lose creditable drug coverage -LRB- such as from an employer or union -RRB- , or you turned 65 before moving abroad or going to prison and now want Part D coverage on your return or release . You do not have to request an SEP in these circumstances , but can just go ahead and sign up with a plan . This kind of SEP lasts 63 days and you must be receiving Part D coverage before it expires to avoid a late penalty . The annual open enrollment period If you miss your deadline for joining Part D during an IEP or an SEP , then you can not enroll in a drug plan until the next OEP . This enrollment period -LRB- which until the end of 2010 ran from November 15 to December 31 -RRB- now runs from October 15 to December 7 each year . You also have to wait for an OEP if you deliberately drop creditable drug coverage that you already have -LRB- for example , from an employer or union -RRB- . The OEP also serves as an annual opportunity for anybody already enrolled in Part D to switch from one plan to another .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Does Health Insurance Cost In California ?
The prices can range anywhere from a thousand dollars a month to free . It depends on just a few factors : Your age , your zip code , the covereages you want , and your income . Here 's a great video I put together on how to shop for health insurance . Copy and paste the link in to your browser . WEBSITELINK
The cost of insurance will vary with the different insurance companies and each will take into consideration your zip code , age , and income if applying for Covered CA . Also , keep in mind the higher the deductible the lower the premium , the lower the deductible the higher the premium . Although you can search the internet for a quote , it 's always best to talk to an insurance broker and review the best options that suits your needs . Do n't let March 31st go by without enrolling into a health plan and end up with a penalty .
It depends on what your looking for in the coverage and the deductible . The more coverage , the more it costs . The lower the deductible the more it costs . Under Covered California depending on your income you might qualify for subsidies to help make your policy more affordable for you while providing you multiple coverage options . It 's best to speak to an agent to determine what your options might be .
The cost of insurance will vary with the different insurance companies and each will take into consideration your zip code and age . Plan price points are based on the benefits sokeep in mind the higher the deductible the lower the premium , the lower the deductible the higher the premium.The plansthrough Covered CA and the off exchange plans are the same with the same prices . The only reason tobuy a Covered CA plan is for the premium subsidy or cost sharing reductions .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
All auto insurers in California are subject to prop 103 laws and guidelines . This means a DUI is chargeable for 3 years , however the person in question with the DUI will not be a California good driver for 10 years . California good driver is a 20 % discount that would not be available by any Insurer operating in California . Not being a good driver in California can potentially make you unacceptable by certain carriers that will only accept California good drivers . Work with many Insurers including Allied and depending on your situation Allied most likely will accept you as an insured but you will not get the good driver discount .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
Actually California has some of the most competitive auto rates in the country due to Prop 103 . While everything else in California is expensive my clients are often pleasantly surprised that the auto insurance rates in California are not sky high . In California we have a different set of rules governed by the Prop 103 law that heavily regulates the rates in California and what an insurance carrier can charge . Insurance rates are not credit based but are heavily rated on your driving record and driving history .
Why is long term care so expensive in California ? Well , probably the main reason is the cost of care in California is also on the higher end . Insurance premium costs use the cost of care , -LRB- or repair or services , with other insurances -RRB- to generate a premium . I would imagine if you looked you might find the cost of care in the state of California is up there .
Insurance is regulated by state . Each state can adopt a different approach to the issue that you have raised . In California , the voters took rating matters into their own hands with a constitutional amendment . Sex or gender , as you say , is not a rating factor in California . That means that in California if you switch sex , switch back and switch again , nothing will change as long as you are residing in California , and driving a car insured in California .
The best life insurance in California is the one that best suits your needs . If you have a health problem , there are a number of companies in California that specialize in impaired risk life insurance . If you have perfect health , there are many good companies that will charge you within a few dollars of one another . The best way to find out your best life insurance is to call an agency , explain your health and the purpose of your life insurance , and let them guide you through some choices . There are many agencies that serve California on the internet or you can look in the Yellow Pages .
When you are convicted of a DUI you will be required to notify the DMV of your financial responsibility . That will trigger a reaction by your insurer . They will know immediately that you have been convicted of DUI . What they do at that point will vary . At renewal you will find that you have been assessed points for the DUI and those points will trail you for 10 years in California . In California you will also lose your good drivers discount . Sometimes clients think that this is the time to shop for auto insurance . Unless you simply can not pay the premium , dropping coverage at this stage is not in your best interests . Your existing insurance company is likely to treat you with more consideration than any subsequent insurance company . By the time you pay the fine , pay for the drivers education course and face the doubling of your auto premiums you will determine that drinking and driving does not pay in California .
The California Department of Insurance -LRB- aka the California Insurance Commissioner 's Office -RRB- . If you are having problems with an insurer you can contact the department at 800-927-4357 if you are within the state of California or 213-897-8921 if you are outside of the state of California . You can also use their contact form , which can be found here : WEBSITELINK
In answering this question , we assume that CDL is an abbreviation for California Drivers License . If you are a California resident seeking to purchase Auto Insurance , it is assumed that you would have a California Drivers License thus not a method of lowering your insurance premium.The State of California allows insurance companies to base auto insurance premium rates on the experience of the driver ; thus the longer you are licensed , your premium would be lower . However , your driving record would be equally important as this would be another method of adjusting rates on a policy . We 'll be happy to answer any more specific questions if and when asked !
Health Insurance , like all forms of insurance , is based on a number of calculations that associated the benefit received with risk taken by the insurer . When you look at a state like California there are many variable factors that go into pricing an insurance product ; age of the insured , current health status , smoker or non smoker , current profession , current address , who will be covered under the policy , etc. . California has one of the highest cost of living indexes around so as that is factored into pricing an insurance product , it affects the bottom line . To help ease the cost of health insurance here you can look at things like -LRB- 1 -RRB- raising your deductible -LRB- 2 -RRB- lowering the amount of co payment you want insurance to cover and -LRB- 3 -RRB- reducing the amount of benefits associated with your policy .
In California the answer is anabsoluteyes . California is governed by proposition 103guidelinesand one of the major rating factors is driving record . Every personal lines auto insurance carrier must rate according to your driving record so 1 point will have an impact . This impact can be quite significant . 2 points in a 3 year period and you are no longer considered a California a good driver . This can cause rates to easily double in many cases . I often see clients who move in from out of state who have points on their driving record get a big shock to find out there rates areaffectedby a ticket . So what is a point you may ask . Any minor moving violation is 1 point . A major moving violation can be 2 points with a DUI coming in at 4 points . A minor at-fault accident is 1 point . A at-fault accident that includes bodily injury is 2 points . You may attend traffic school for a minor violation in most areas once every 18 months . All the rest you just have to wait out the 3 years until the points drop off your record . Also some insurance carriers reward drivers for clean driving records that go beyond 3 years so even though your points may have dropped off you still may not be receiving the best rates possible until 5-7 years . And by the way , Insurance carriers in California will check the driving record once a year minimum if not more often . If you move from one carrier to the next an upfront motor vehicle record is always ran .
Every year , make and model of automobile is assigned a specific symbol . The symbols are alphabetical . The symbol tracks the experience the industry and the company have with that particular year , make and model . As you can imagine a manufacturer like Mercedes Benz has a wide variety of symbols . The symbol is but a part of the computation of the premium . The insurance companies in California are restricted to a few criteria to further evaluate the risk . The California insurers will look at the driving record of every driver in the household and will assess points if there are violations present , particularly with the assigned driver . The points based upon a drivers record have a compounding effect because in California a driver with less than two points is considered a good driver and awarded a substantial discount . Another factor that influences the company is the presence of inexperienced drivers . The accident record of the household is also considered closely . Claims for bodily injury receive a great deal of scrutiny . Most points given for accidents or violations remain on the driving record for three years . Racing and DUI convictions remain on the record for ten years . In California the distance you driver your Mercedes Benz each year is also a part of the computation . Services are available to insurance companies that track your mileage every time the vehicle is serviced . These services project you annual mileage and companies use bands of factors to develop the final premium . There are a few additional factors considered such as location where the car is being garaged , and occupation of the drivers in the household , Most automobile insurance is rated by a computer with little additional input from a live underwriter or agent . All of this information is used to compile a premium that the insurance company considers adequate for the risk . If approved by the computer , the agent is authorized to issue the policy and subject to potential additional review , the policy is in force .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
2015 in California , individuals qualify for subsidy if they are between 138 % and 400 % of the federal poverty level and are not eligible for creditable and affordable coverage elsewhere . Insurance plan needs to be purchased thru Covered California Exchange . As stated above . Businesses may be eligible for a Tax Credit . To qualify , company needs to have fewer than 25 employees . Average employee salary less than $ 50,000 . Excluding owners . Employer pay at least 50 % of health care premium . You will need to offer coverage thru SHOP marketplace . In Califonria , that would be Covered California . The tax credit can be up to 50 % of employer contribution . I was looking for area that i could post 2015 Individual Subsidy Income Guideline that is handy when reviewing options ?
A state approved voluntary plan for Disability Insurance is offered by the State of California . Employers in California may use the State Plan or a Voluntary Plan to cover their employees . Contact the Employment Development Dept for the State of California for details and options for your Disability coverage .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Why Not To Get Long Term Care Insurance ?
The biggest reason to not get long term care insurance is if you can not afford it . If you are scraping by on Social Security income only , you probably can not afford long term care insurance . However , if you have a lot of assets that you want to pass to your heirs , they could pay the premiums for a long term care policy for you . If you have few assets and low income , that is a good reason to not get long term care insurance .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Under Medicare any type of Home Health Care is limited . They will provide some skilled care on a temporary basis but Medicare generally will not pay for custodial care in any long term care environment . That is why it is important to carry some type of Long Term Care Insurance that will provide Home Health Care . Some policies even pay family members for providing care . A good agent who does long term care planning can help you find a program that will help .
The two main advantages of Long Term Care Insurance are : 1 -RRB- Paying for your long term care needs without having to spend down your assets , and 2 -RRB- Having a say in the care that you get . As Care Plan Coordinator for a nursing home , I saw the advantages of Long Term Care Insurance up close . It can enable you to get a private room , get out into your home more quickly , and other perks that are not possible when on Medicaid . Not everyone can afford Long Term Care Insurance , and Medicaid is a blessing for those who need it . But there definitely are advantages to having Long Term Care Insurance .
Harry Crosby , a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- agent , coach and trainer , has one of the best answers to this question that I know of . It 's called `` The Two Mistakes '' . In the interest of space , I have edited his take on this important question : There are really only two mistakes you can make with long-term care insurance . Mistake number one : You get one of these plans . It doesnt matter which one . You buy a plan , pay every year , live a long happy and healthy life , die in your sleep with a smile on your face and the money you paid in is gone . Right . The money you paid in is gone . Had you known that this would be the case , you would never have purchased a long-term carepolicy . Mistake number two : You stay self-insured , which is what you are doing right now . Then you -LRB- and possibly your spouse -RRB- need care . Not only do you pay for it yourself out-of-pocket , but the rest of the burden is placed on your family . Lets look at the two mistakes . Mistake number one is that you get this plan , and your premium is about $ 2,500 a year . You live another 30 years , and at age 85 you die in your sleep with a smile on your face never needing a day of care and thus never getting a dime out of the policy . You get to the pearly gates , they look at your file , and they laugh at you because you made a $ 75,000 mistake for having this policy and never needed it . By the way , that amount is less than one year of facility care in todays dollars . Now , mistake number two . You decide to not get this policy and pay the premium . Twenty years from now , when you are 75 , you need care for just two years . You pay for the care out-of-pocket . Based on past trends , the average cost of future care will be about $ 350,000 . If you have to make a mistake , which mistake has the least impact on your family : the first one or the second one ? That is why top financial advisors and the federal and state government encourage people like you and I to look into LTCI . It is just common sense .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Where To Buy Cheap Life Insurance ?
Life insurance is priced the same for everyone . You can not get a discount on life insurance , and the discount store mentality does not work well with life insurance . You need to work with a knowledgeable agent to get your cheapest price . Getting a low quote from someone who knows little about life insurance does not mean you will get that price . I feel that the best way to buy cheap life insurance is to use an agency who can take your health information and match you up with the company that has your best rates . Some , like mine , can be found online . But wherever you go , the place to buy cheap life insurance is where the agent is valuable .
Well sometimes there can be certain people that will need a term policy because of where they have focused their budget in the past , over all it does n't fit every persons goals but will be cheaper . I will use my story to answer the question when I purchased my policy I realized that it would take some focus on my part even working with a very knowledgeable agent I already knew just like most families we wait until about 45 -55 years of age to purchase what we should have purchased in our 20 's in the first place and then we start shopping to find out wow this is not cheap but it is now or never . So $ 300 a month was not cheap for me but I knew it 's now or never so I made a commitment to my family it 's now I want leave them with this burden it 's just a decision just like the one that caused you to make the decision to wait . now where did that come from procrastination and that can be inherited by your children so I would say change your focus change your life .
The cheapest life insurance policy is the one that you already own . The cheapest life insurance policy you can buy is one that is scheduled to expire the day after you die . The fact is that the cheapest life insurance policy is always the one that is in force on the day that you die . If that is your concern work with a good life insurance agent . The agent can match your needs with a policy that will fit into your budget . Remember that when you save money on the premium and the policy expires before you die ; it is your loved ones that pay the price .
Life insurance premiums can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including age , sex , health , and residence . Prices , and underwriting practices , also vary dramatically by company . The best way to find `` cheap '' coverage is to speak to an agent that represents many different carriers , giving the agent the ability to shop your case to find you the absolute lowest rates possible . Unlike health insurance , life premiums can vary , often by 400 % or more , based on your health . You normally take a paramed exam to verify your health status , so be advised that the rate you are originally quoted may increase after the exam .
Life insurance is priced the same for everyone . You can not get a discount on life insurance , and the discount store mentality does not work well with life insurance . You need to work with a knowledgeable agent to get your cheapest price . Getting a low quote from someone who knows little about life insurance does not mean you will get that price . I feel that the best way to buy cheap life insurance is to use an agency who can take your health information and match you up with the company that has your best rates . Some , like mine , can be found online . But wherever you go , the place to buy cheap life insurance is where the agent is valuable .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! There is a reason why things are cheap . You buy a cheap car , you spend a lot on repairs . You buy cheap clothes , they rip or shrink . Term insurance is cheap because it has very few perks , like a whole life policy would . Your term policy will have no cash value , and will end at a specific time . Because there is no management of your cash involved , and the odds are great that the company will collect from you for years and not have to pay you anything , those policies can be sold very cheaply . About the only way that you can stack the odds back in your favor and get money out of your policy would be to get a `` return of premium '' policy or rider . For a larger premium payment , this allows you to receive back most of what you had paid into the policy . If you have questions , feel free to drop me a line , okay ? Thanks for asking !
As Peggy noted , it 's really cheap to buy life insurance on a newborn baby . The primary underwriting factor is the responses to yes or no health questions - there are no exam requirements for them because of their age -LRB- they 're babies ! -RRB- . Many parents look at buying a whole life policy because it 's very cheap and can be kept for life . A great rider to look at adding to a WL policy on a child is a guaranteed insurability option rider -LRB- GIO -RRB- - in short , this rider says that you can increase the face amount at certain intervals with no additional medical underwriting . Another option many parents consider is adding a child rider onto their own policy - this is a very cheap and easy way to add term coverage for your children . Let me know if I can be of further help . Thanks !
Lets use the analogy of living in a home . You basically have two choices : to buy , or to rent . Suppose you rent . Why would you do that ? First of all , you dont have to put any money up . Nor do you have to pay any real estate taxes . Nor do you have to pay for any maintenance . Its basically a cheap way to put a roof over your head . But , you always have the option to buy . Suppose now you buy . Why would you do that ? Equity . You have something to show for your money . Your home attains a monetary value that can be exploited . Of course , it costs more . But you get more . And you still get a roof over your head . This model is useful for understanding life insurance . Term insurance is like renting a home . Its a pretty cheap way to get the coverage you need . No equity , no added value . But you can convert it to a permanent policy . Whole life equates to buying a home . You pay more , but you get more . There is cash available for you to use , in addition to the survivor benefit for your heirs - that roof over your head . Make sense ?
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
You need renters insurance when you have something to loose . That something could be more than your stuff . It could be the reasonable rent you have . If there were a fire , and you had to leave for another apartment , you might have to pay more rent . LOSS OF USE is a coverage built in to the policy . If you have to leave your 2 bedroom , second floor apartment where you pay $ 500 a month because of a fire , you can move into a similar apartment and if that similar apartment cost more , LOSS OF USE will pay for the extra -LRB- above $ 500 -RRB- rent . It will not pay for you to move into a four bedroom penthouse apartment . That 's not similar . If a friend or someone else visits , goes to the bathroom and slips on the floor they could get injured ... badly . A renters policy includes two important coverages : MEDICAL PAYMENTS and BODILY INJURY LIABILITY . MEDICAL PAYMENTS would pay hospital or doctor expenses necessary to treat your friend . The limit is usually $ 1,000 but you can buy more and it 's cheap . If your friend gets a lawyer and sues you , BODILY INJURY LIABILIYT will pay for an attorney to defend you AND pay the damages if you lose . The limits generally start at $ 100,000 , but check the price for higher limits as it also is cheap . Finally , there is your stuff . Maybe it 's used and worn and you do n't think it 's worth a lot . But if you had to go out and buy EVERYTHING all over again , it would be expensive . You can buy insurance that will replace your old stuff with new stuff . You just have to make sure you have REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE . REMEMBER : Insurance does not cover everything for every imaginable kind of claim . There are limits and exclusions . They are generally the same from company to company . Find an agent you can talk to and ask questions . Good Luck Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers 877-414-2031 WEBSITELINK
By cheap I assume that you are referring to the premium . The cheap I like to think of is the cost when you have the claim and your company stands behind you and pays everything that you expected . Regardless of the premium , you will then know what cheap really means . A major property loss could take 100 years of premiums to pay for . Having correct coverage is the way to have the truly cheap homeowners policy , find an agent , one you can trust .
Well sometimes there can be certain people that will need a term policy because of where they have focused their budget in the past , over all it does n't fit every persons goals but will be cheaper . I will use my story to answer the question when I purchased my policy I realized that it would take some focus on my part even working with a very knowledgeable agent I already knew just like most families we wait until about 45 -55 years of age to purchase what we should have purchased in our 20 's in the first place and then we start shopping to find out wow this is not cheap but it is now or never . So $ 300 a month was not cheap for me but I knew it 's now or never so I made a commitment to my family it 's now I want leave them with this burden it 's just a decision just like the one that caused you to make the decision to wait . now where did that come from procrastination and that can be inherited by your children so I would say change your focus change your life .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
There are many cheap auto insurance companies throughout the US . -LRB- That is ... carriers that charge low rates -RRB- How cheap will your rate be ? It depends where you live and other underwriting factors that could impact the price . For example , while Progressive , Esurance , Geico and Erie may offer low rates in Ohio , in Pennsylvania or New Jersey , a completely different set of companies may be the best option . As experienced brokers , along with our top-rated websites , we search , find and compare the absolute lowest car insurance rates in all ares . That 's our job and a big reason why customers prefer to work with brokers .
Term life insurance is cheap because it only pays out if death occurs during that period of time . The lower the age , the lower the actuarial risk of passing away , the lower the price . To get a policy that will be assured to be there to the end of life , the premium may be reasonable , but not necessarily `` cheap '' . Knowing it will be there for your loved ones at the time of need can definitely make it worth the cost . That is not to say there is not a need for cheap term life insurance . Thankfully , both Term and Permanent policies are available so that coverage is available and affordable for nearly anyone who wants it .
Remember cheap does n't mean better . What you want to find is a reputable company AND cheap rates . Compare your coverages as well as the rates - this is what I tell my clients . Another thing to look at is who is selling you the cheap rates - do you have a 1-800 telemarketer to talk to or a Licensed Agent who knows exactly what 's covered in your state ?
Cheap car insurance can be as little as $ 20 or $ 30 per month , depending on where you live , the type of car you drive , your age , and of course , the liability limits you have . Some carriers offer discounts that can total as much as 50 % . It is , however , important to understand that state minimum liability limits may leave you underinsured . Although low liability limits result in very cheap pricing , it 's important that we , as experienced unbiased brokers , advise you which coverages may be the most appropriate . To find the lowest rates , always utilize an experienced broker . Not only do we offer unbiased advice and top-notch websites , but you can also save time and money by quickly finding the best prices . The quoting process typically takes only a few minutes and you 'll be able to view the best options in your area .
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance If I Have Lung Cancer ?
If you are currently receiving treatment for lung cancer , unfortunately you are unable to get a life insurance policy unless it is guaranteed issue . Guaranteed issue policies do not ask any health questions and usually have a minimum age of 40 to 55 . They also will have a graded period the first years of the policy , and have a fairly low maximum face amount -LRB- under $ 50,000 -RRB- . Then when you have been cancer free for a while your options will improve .
Insurability is realative to the company , type of policy , the stage of the disease , otherfamily and medical historyand the amount you want to spend for coverage . Almost everyone is insurable with any number of malidies it all depends on the company and the policies that they offer as to whether or not lung cancer is an acceptable risk . The best place to find out the answers to questions like this is your local agent . Give them a call .
While trying to purchase a life insurance policy with a history of cancer can prove challenging , even if the cancer has been effectively treated and eliminated , it is possible in fact possible to get term life insurance with a cancer history . The rates for a life insurance policy is determined by the risk classification you qualify for . For example , a person who qualifies for a standard risk class would be viewed as having a normal life expectancy , while someone who only qualifies for a substandard rate -LRB- also known as a table rating and designated with letters A-J or 1-10 -RRB- is considered to have a shorter than normal life expectancy . Since the life expectancy would be considered shorter for someone with a history of cancer , a table rating may be assigned and a higher premium charged . Every life insurance company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may respond with a more favorable risk class offer than others even though they 're based on the same exact medical profile . There are several key items that insurance companies will look at to determine the risk classification assigned for your policy . Some of those items include : 1 -RRB- Type of cancer - colon cancer , breast cancer , lung cancer , prostate cancer , melanoma , ovarian cancer , skin cancer , or other internal cancers . 2 -RRB- Stage of cancer - Stage 0 , Stage 1 , Stage 2 , Stage 3 , or Stage 4 . Stage 0 is carcinoma in situ and means the cancer likely has not spread to other organs . Stages 1 , 2 , and 3 indicate more extensive disease with larger tumors or spreading . In Stage 4 , the cancer has spread to other organs and life expectancy is usually very short . 3 -RRB- If there was melanoma only , the `` Clark Level '' would be considered the same way the above stages are . 4 -RRB- Course of treatment how was the cancer treated ? Did you go through chemotherapy or radiation ? Surgery only ? Immunotherapy ? Bone marrow transplant ? something else ? 5 -RRB- How long since the treatment was completed/last date of treatment ? - cancer that was found and treated 5 or more years ago will be seen more favorably than cancer diagnosed only 1-2 years ago . The longer it 's been since the cancer was treated/eliminated/went into remission , the less likely it is considered to come back . 6 -RRB- Have you been treated/are being treated for any other health conditions such as heart disease , diabetes , high blood pressure , high cholesterol , abnormal lab test results , etc. . The best way to obtain term life insurance with medical history including cancer is with the help of an independent life insurance agent that represents many of the top insurance companies . They will be able to shop your full medical history for the best possible offer before applying for a policy . That way , you know what the most likely outcome will be before ever starting the process of filling out formal paperwork and taking an exam . Not only that , but there are no charges or fees for using the help of an agent -LRB- agents are paid by the insurance companies -RRB- . The insurance cost is exactly the same as if purchasing directly from the company . By law , the insurance company can not charge you less for applying directly . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including shopping the case , providing quotes , and comparing options , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you are of the age to get guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- all the policies I know of require a minimum age of 40 to 55 -RRB- , you can get life insurance with lung cancer . If your last treatment was at least a year ago and your cancer has been in remission for that time , you can get a simplified issue policy . If you have been cancer free for several years , you may be able to get a medically underwritten policy . The longer the time has past , the better your rate will be .
If you are currently receiving treatment for lung cancer , unfortunately you are unable to get a life insurance policy unless it is guaranteed issue . Guaranteed issue policies do not ask any health questions and usually have a minimum age of 40 to 55 . They also will have a graded period the first years of the policy , and have a fairly low maximum face amount -LRB- under $ 50,000 -RRB- . Then when you have been cancer free for a while your options will improve .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have lupus ? Well , it depends upon some of the answers to these questions . The first is , I need to know the date it was first diagnosed . And then , what type of lupus was diagnosed ? Was it systemic ? Was it discoid lupus or drug induced SLE ? I 'll also need to know , is it in remission , or is it currently present ? Then I need to go through this checklist . Do I have low blood count , neurological disorders , protein issues , high blood pressure , lung involvement , heart involvement , renal insufficiency or failure altogether ? Is the insured taking any medications ? All these areas will give us an idea of how to price and get an offer from a specific carrier that is really benevolent in their underwriting when it comes to lupus .
If the skin cancer is single cell skin cancer -LRB- the most common -RRB- it wo n't affect it much if any . But if it is melanoma it is much more serious and will make you uninsurable with most life insurance companies . Melanoma is just as serious as internal cancers such as lung cancer . Many people die from it each year .
AARP has a number of policies , so the questions asked depend on which policy you are apply for . But one that has three health questions is AARP 's term policy , which Larry described . Here are those questions at this point in time : 1 . In the past 2 years , have you had treatment or medication for or been diagnosed by a doctor as having heart trouble , stroke , cancer , lung disease or disorder , diabetes , liver or kidney disease , AIDS , AIDS Related Complex , or immune system disorder ? 2 . In the past 2 years , for any condition , have you been admitted to or confined in a hospital , sanitarium , nursing home , extended care or special treatment facility ? 3 . In the past 3 months , have you consulted a doctor or had treatment , medication or diagnostic tests of any type ? -LRB- Note : You are not required to report negative AIDS or HIV tests -RRB- .
At this time , AARP 's three health questions for their term insurance are : 1 . In the past 2 years , have you had treatment or medication for or been diagnosed by a doctor as having heart trouble , stroke , cancer , lung disease or disorder , diabetes , liver or kidney disease , AIDS , AIDS Related Complex , or immune system disorder ? 2 . In the past 2 years , for any condition , have you been admitted to or confined in a hospital , sanitarium , nursing home , extended care or special treatment facility ? 3 . In the past 3 months , have you consulted a doctor or had treatment , medication or diagnostic tests of any type ? -LRB- Note : You are not required to report negative AIDS or HIV tests -RRB- .
Insurability is realative to the company , type of policy , the stage of the disease , otherfamily and medical historyand the amount you want to spend for coverage . Almost everyone is insurable with any number of malidies it all depends on the company and the policies that they offer as to whether or not lung cancer is an acceptable risk . The best place to find out the answers to questions like this is your local agent . Give them a call .
Smokers , and other forms of tobacco use , are detrimental to your health . It is not unusual for long term smokers to develop cancer of the lungs , mouth or throat . Many develop emphysema or COPD . Any of these conditions will shorten your lifespan . If the insurance carrier believes your tobacco habit will cause you to die sooner than `` normal '' they will charge a higher rate to compensate for the additional risk .
Another way to think about this question is , `` How much woulda disabling event cost you without coverage ? '' Considering Brandon 's well-thought out response to you , also thinking about the question from the darker side makes many of us uneasy inside though . -LSB- I do n't like to think something like that can happen , but it does . -RSB- From personal experience , I can tell you that disability insurance and critical illness insurance has a very real place in anyone 's planning who has a paycheck and depends on that paycheck for their living . Period . I am now 42 years old and at the age of 27 I delivered a very healthy baby girl - went home from the hospital after 4 days like normaland on the 5th day had a pulmonary embolism that locked up both of my lungs almost to the point of death . So instead of being gone from my job for 8 weeks on maternity leave , I was gone for almost 5 months . Without my DI and CI policies , it would have been a financially crippling event for my family . It was not expected - but it unfortunately happened . Brandon shared some very realistic numbers here for consideration . I applaud anyone looking into these ancillary policies to protect their planning . Sheryl Brown / @AshBrokerage
All these conditions must be met for Medicare to cover the cost of oxygen and supplies needed for delivery of oxygen : You are diagnosed with a severe lung disease or have been told by your doctor that you are not getting enough oxygen ; Your health might not improve without oxygen therapy ; Your arterial blood gas level falls within a certain range ; and Alternative methods of treating you have not worked .
Yes , you can be declined for a medical condition and/or adverse health history as it pertains to `` morbidity '' . Morbidity involves a reduced ability to perform mental or physical activities . Such ailments as arthritis , cognitive impairment , Alzheimer 's disease , advanced osteoporosis , lung malfunction , and blindness are all classified under morbidity . If one uses tobacco and has any morbidity issue , that usually results in a decline as well , but smoking by itself does not often result in a decline.Underwriting for long-term care insurance is getting tighter . Genworth , for instance , will soon be requiring some medical work for applicants , which may include lab tests -LRB- urine sample and blood draw -RRB- . Carriers are also moving toward gender-based premiums , with male applicant costs being lower than female applicant costs due to the fact that more women go on claim than men . This is also true for most insurance , so it 's not a new concept . Life insurance costs are higher for men than women because women live longer . Disability Insurance has had gender-based rates for quite a while . Only Montana has mandatory uni-sex rates for all insurance.Before submitting a formal application for long-term care , an applicant should be pre-screened by completing a medical questionnaire provided either by the carrier or the representing agent . Applicants should answer all answers truthfully and completely to determine medical eligibility . It is better to be told not to submit an application due to confidential prescreening than have a formal application declined .
The upper end of cost could be anything depending on amount and health . The lowest I have seen is zero . At least one company will give a small child rider at no cost on a parent or grandparent 's policy . Many child riders fall in the range of $ 20,000 for for about $ 8 . per month . However that covers all minor children . So if you have 4 children your per child cost would be $ 2 . Coverage usually stays in force as long as the base plan does up to the child 's age 25 . And is convertible to five time the original amount . with no evidence of good health . This can be a very important feature . Individual plans run a very wide range based on the type and amount . Recently we wrote a child with a lung disease $ 25,000 of whole life at about $ 20 per month and a 17 year old $ 250,000 term for about $ 14 per month . So the answer is , $ 0 to a lot . Best to talk to an independent agent .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have cancer ? Well , it depends upon a lot of questions . The type of cancer diagnosed , the date first diagnosis occurred . I need to know was it treated by surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , hormonal therapy . I 'll also need to know , enlist the stage of the cancer , as well as the grade of the cancer . I need to know also , has it spread to other parts of the body , because that 's going to be issue for us to be able to underwrite . And then the last one is has there been proper follow ups to your cancer ? Which is CT scans , X-rays , bone scans , laboratory work . I need to know those kinds of things to accumulate enough information to give you the proper offer . Remember , certain carriers are more benevolent in certain types of cancers than others .
Quick answer : yes . Definite answer : we have to see . Here are some underwriting considerations : How long ago was it diagnosed ? How often do flares occur ? How are pain and joint swelling controlled ? What medications are being used ? Have the medications affected the heart , lungs or kidneys ? Any complications such as bone erosion or cartilage damage ? Any deformities to bones or joins ? Have the deformities impaired functioning ? Well , there you go . Once these questions are answered , you will know for sure .
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
While in the midst of cancer treatments , the only type of Life Insurance one can get is Guaranteed Issue . Since there are age limits on guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- minimum age is usually 45 +0 -RRB- , and since it is not available in every state , not everyone can get coverage while having cancer that is not yet removed , cured , or in remission . After a year or two of being cancer free , there are several simplified issue policies that are available in addition to guaranteed issue , and some of these will work for persons under age 45 . The farther out from the time of being last treated for cancer , the better the chances of getting a regular life insurance policy . The type and stage of cancer also enter in . To find out whether you can get life insurance as a cancer patient or survivor , call an agent who can walk through the questions with you and who has an arsenal of policies to choose from . Get one locked in now , and hopefully you can find a cheaper one in the future .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Use A PO Box For Car Insurance ?
As a mailing address yes , but not as your physical address . In almost all cases your auto insurance rates are based in part on your physical address zip code . To ensure that you are receiving the proper rate for the risk that the carrier is accepting when providing you with coverage they need to know where you garage your vehicle amongst other information .
I am not aware of any insurance carrier that would be willing to accept a client using a PO Box as an address of residence . If you are using the PO Box for mailing purposes only , then you may be able to use the PO Box for auto insurance mailings .
The car must have a household attached to it . That means that a physical address is necessary . That doesnt mean that correspondence needs to go to that address . You can establish a P.O. Box for correspondence . The place that you call your domicile is the address that the insurance company is looking for .
I am not aware of any insurance carrier that would be willing to accept a client using a PO Box as an address of residence . If you are using the PO Box for mailing purposes only , then you may be able to use the PO Box for auto insurance mailings .
I am not aware of an insurance carrier that would be willing to accept a PO Box as your physical address . Your auto insurance rates are based in part on your geographic location so the carrier must have your physical address for your premise . Many carriers will accept a PO Box for mailing purposes though .
This is something that would be good to talk about with your Insurance professional , but I think you will find that in most states , Connecticut included , the Department of Motor Vehicles wo n't allow you to register a car to a Post Office Box number . You will need a physical address for that . Of course , you can always have your insurance documents and billing statements sent to your PO Box if you choose .
I do sell quite a bit of SBLI term life and if you select monthly you should be on an automatic bank draft or EFT . You can visit their website at WEBSITELINK and select `` Service '' then click on `` Make a Payment '' to set up an EFT . You may also snail mail a check to SBLI USA Life Insurance , PO Box 646 , Newwark , NJ 07101-0646 .
If you are looking for long-term care insurance in Florida , make sure you are dealing with an agent that has the proper certification . As Ms. Mace mentioned we have to be licensed to sell health insurance . In Florida , we also must take an additional class and pass the test to receive a certification to sell long-term care insurance . It is one of Florida 's ways of ensuring the customer is protected . I have my certification so if you are in North Florida please feel free to contact me : 3525145295 , cscottbannon@hotmail.com or PO Box 786 Keystone Heights FL 32656 . I would love to meet with you so we can individualize a plan of protection for you and your family . With much appreciation . To your prosperity .
That is a great question ! Whenever you deposit money into an account , be it at your bank , credit union , or annuity fund , that money does n't just sit there in a box labelled `` you '' . The financial institution immediately takes the money from the `` you '' box , and uses it to cover their expenses , pay out someone else , or invest it to make their profits . When you take that money out early , it costs them , as they were planning on it being there until the annuitization phase of your annuity was scheduled to begin . Now they have to scramble to get the money back into the `` you '' box . That often costs them money from the interest they were earning by using the money you 'd put in your `` box '' . To recapture some of their loss , and to act as an incentive to deter you from pulling out your `` box '' early , they assess the surrender charges . You will notice that they are highest at the beginning of your annuity , and decrease as time goes on . That is because the longer your money stays with them , the more likely it is that they 've earned what they needed to to repay your money with it 's promised interest . Does that help ? I hope so , feel free to contact me if it does n't , okay ? Thanks for asking !
POS stands for Point of Service . POS forms of health insurance can be considered a middle ground between HMO 's and PPO 's . The POS program can be an attractive form of health insurance for participants who do not want to be restricted to receiving medical care only from network providers yet still would like to receive the same coverage and wellness benefits provided through a managed care system .
Medicare POS -LRB- point of service -RRB- plans have limited networks and if you want full coverage -LRB- without penalty -RRB- you should choose a par provider . Some POS plans require a referral which should minimize or eliminate any non-par penalties . Usually in a medical emergency situations the carrier will waive non-par penalties . Keep in mind you can still be balance billed by providers not in the POS network .
This truly depends on your zipcode as well . Medicare Advantage plans include Hmo , Hmo-Pos , PPO and PFFS plans . Hmo-pos plans work like a ppo in the sense that you have in and out of network benefits -LRB- out of network benefit co pays are normally a little higher -RRB- . Here in Chicago we have many awesome Hmo-Pos plans that not only allow in and out of network benefits but also can include part D , Dental , Vision and other benefits .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
Point Of Service plans -LRB- POS plans -RRB- are sort of a blend of HMO and PPO plans . Like an HMO , your plan may require you assign a primary care doctor and have them make referrals if you want/need to see a specialist . The PPO similarity comes from the fact that you mayreceive care from non-network providers but with greater out-of-pocket costs . You may also be responsible for co-payments , coinsurance and an annual deductible . POS plans are useful for those who are willing to coordinate their care through their primary care doctor and the doctor is in-network .
Most of us keep our copies of our auto insurance policies in the glove box of the car , right ? So the proof of insurance is always with the car . The point is that the car insurance always follows the car . If you gave the person driving permission to drive , then any accident that occurs will be covered by the owners car insurance , even if the person does not own insurance of their own . If someone becomes a regular driver however , they should be added to the policy . In fact , if it 's an adult with a good driving record , it could in some cases make the premium go down .
A POS plan is an `` HMO/PPO '' hybrid ; sometimes referred to as an `` open-ended '' HMO when offered by an HMO . POS plans resemble HMOs for in-network services . Services received outside of the network are usually reimbursed in a manner similar to conventional indemnity plans -LRB- e.g. , provider reimbursement based on a fee schedule or usual , customary and reasonable charges -RRB- .
Some carriers are doing exactly what Ty said ... they have a box that can be checked and you have the `` extra coverage '' needed for a ride share gig . WITHOUT the endorsement , your `` normal car insurance '' is very , very , very unlikely to cover any claim while your vehicle is being used for `` business use '' . That applies to anyone like a real estate agent , insurance agent , or anyone else that wraps their car , drives prospects & clients around , etc. ... . KNOW what you 're buying .
Original Medicare is `` old school '' dating back to the way health care worked in the 60 's . At that time there were no managed care organizations , no PPO 's , no POS and except in a very few areas , no HMO 's . Patients were free to use any doctor , any lab , any hospital anywhere . When you receive medical care under Medicare , if it is considered medically necessary , your provider is paid a fee . Medicare Advantage is NOT fee for service . In most cases you are required to use only participating doctors .
PCP -LRB- primary care provider -RRB- is terminology normally used in HMO and POS plans where referrals are needed to see a specialist . Your PCP can be a doctor , nurse practitioner , physicians assistant , etc. . When you first sign up for the coverage you are required to pick a PCP . You can change your primary provider in the future if you wish , but they will be considered a `` gatekeeper '' of sorts providing you with access to specialist care .
There are various ways . My best advice would be to contact your insurance professional and ask . This assumes that you did not obtain your policy through on line sources of course . Check in your car 's glove box . There you should find an Insurance Identification Card issued by your carrier and showing the name and contact information for that carrier . In most states , you would have had to provide proof of insurance at teh time you registered your car .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Where Can I Get Medigap Insurance In Georgia ?
The best place to get a Medigap plan in Georgia is through an Agent that is Independent and working for you . A great benefit of a Medigap plan is that the level of coverage is standardized by the government . Every Insurance Company is offering the same level of coverage using letters A through N . The major difference being the price of the plan as each company offer a different price for the same amount of coverage . A good Independent Agent will have many companies to look at and be able to discuss the best price offer . This best price is not always based on the current rates for your age . They need to be able to discuss the company 's pricing history at ages down the road . You do not want a company that lures you in with a low initial premium and then historically raises it as you get older . You should consider the Customer Service of the Insurance Company and look for a responsive company that answers your questions and can work with your agent . Your agent should be able to help over the phone or be there in person if needed .
Essentially there are two ways to buy a Medigap plan in Georgia . You can buy direct from a carrier or through an agent . When you buy direct from the carrier you get the same plan at the same rate as buying from an agent . Carriers have in house representatives that can only tell you about their plan . They do n't know about competitor plans and are prohibited from discussing a competitor plans . Once you purchase a plan from a carrier any follow up questions are handled by a CSR rep. When you call you can expect to have an automated service answer your call , following the obligatory `` Press 1 for English '' you will be told to `` Please listen carefully as our options have changed '' . From there you will be routed most often to voice mail . Your call will be returned on their schedule , not yours . You will never talk to the same person twice . Or you can buy from an agent that lives in Georgia and is familiar with plans in your area . Some agents will insist on coming to your home , while others will allow you to purchase over the phone using email and your mailbox . Some agents will only represent one carrier . If you go that route you might as well buy direct . Most agents will represent several carriers and help you understand the pro 's and con 's of each carrier . They will be familiar with rate history and can tell you which ones have a better track record of customer service . There are about 15 or so carriers in GA that offer Medigap . Some only sell direct or through their own representatives . Others use independent brokers that represent several carriers . Maybe a third of carriers make their rates available online but most will only disclose rates if you talk to them direct or through an agent . Hint : Some of the most competitive rates are not found online ... Most of the plans use issue age rating but a few , including the top two carriers -LRB- ranked by sales -RRB- use attained age brackets . You need to understand the difference in pricing structure and rate history if you want to avoid sticker shock on renewal . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
Health Insurance rates in Georgia are going up . Each family 's cost is going to be different . Your best resource is a local broker that represents multiple companies including major medical companies . The rates in Georgia are different in the Atlanta metro area versus other parts of Georgia . You will need to look at the networks in your area and determine if your doctors are in the network being offered by the insurance company . Health Reform has brought challenges to the price of family coverage . There are new options in the Georgia market to help handle the rising premiums . You might consider clinic programs , tele-medicine , high deductible plans , or many other solutions that lower costs and improve Out of Pocket expenses . The Health Insurance world is changing and you will need help . Do a web search for your area and health insurance and do a review of your current situation to determine if you can do better .
Medigap Plans will vary in cost depending on your age , smoking status and the state that you live in . It will also depend on which Plan you go with . Some plans can range between $ 100 - $ 200 per month in states like South Carolina , North Carolina , Colorado , Texas , Michigan and Georgia . However , premiums in Southern Florida are generally higher than in other areas of Florida . The amount of co-insurance , deductibles and co-pays you can save by having a Medigap Plan makes it a very easy decision to make . You can get more information on our website about what the different Medigap Plans would cost . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
Essentially there are two ways to buy a Medigap plan in Georgia . You can buy direct from a carrier or through an agent . When you buy direct from the carrier you get the same plan at the same rate as buying from an agent . Carriers have in house representatives that can only tell you about their plan . They do n't know about competitor plans and are prohibited from discussing a competitor plans . Once you purchase a plan from a carrier any follow up questions are handled by a CSR rep. When you call you can expect to have an automated service answer your call , following the obligatory `` Press 1 for English '' you will be told to `` Please listen carefully as our options have changed '' . From there you will be routed most often to voice mail . Your call will be returned on their schedule , not yours . You will never talk to the same person twice . Or you can buy from an agent that lives in Georgia and is familiar with plans in your area . Some agents will insist on coming to your home , while others will allow you to purchase over the phone using email and your mailbox . Some agents will only represent one carrier . If you go that route you might as well buy direct . Most agents will represent several carriers and help you understand the pro 's and con 's of each carrier . They will be familiar with rate history and can tell you which ones have a better track record of customer service . There are about 15 or so carriers in GA that offer Medigap . Some only sell direct or through their own representatives . Others use independent brokers that represent several carriers . Maybe a third of carriers make their rates available online but most will only disclose rates if you talk to them direct or through an agent . Hint : Some of the most competitive rates are not found online ... Most of the plans use issue age rating but a few , including the top two carriers -LRB- ranked by sales -RRB- use attained age brackets . You need to understand the difference in pricing structure and rate history if you want to avoid sticker shock on renewal . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
Your best Medigap plan is the one that is affordable and covers what you expect the plan to cover . All Medicare supplement insurance plans with the same letter are identical in every way except the premium . Medigap plan F is the most popular , but It is also the most expensive plan . A couple from south Georgia needed to save money on their Medigap plan . After a few moments on the phone , I showed them how to save over $ 1700 per year by making a simple switch in coverage . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
Health insurance is regulated by each state . Before you can buy a policy in Georgia -LRB- as an example -RRB- a carrier must file their policy form and rates with the state Dept. of Insurance and wait on approval . This is a long and costly process . About a year ago GA passed a law that allowed carriers to market products from other states in Georgia . So far not a single carrier has filed for approval to sell in Georgia . Despite what some people believe , even if you were able to buy coverage from another state the savings would be nominal , if anything at all .
Medigap plan costs -LRB- rates -RRB- are determined by zip code , age , gender , tobacco use , plan selected and most important of all , the carrier . Medigap plan F may vary by a factor of 2 between the highest and lowest cost . It is not unusual here in Georgia to see rates ranging from $ 140 to $ 265 for plan F . When you pay more you do n't get more , you simply paid too much .
Medigap plan C covers essentially everything included in Medigap plan F. Plan C covers your Medicare Part A and Part B deductibles and coinsurance , benefits for SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- and foreign travel . Plan C does not cover Medicare excess charges . Very few carriers offer plan C and I have not found it to be competitive in Georgia .
The best Medicare supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan in Florida is the one that fits your own needs and budget . When you consider all Medicare supplement insurance plans with the same letter are identical in every way except the premium , the decision is much easier . Medigap plan F is the most popular , mostly because it is oversold . Far too many agents promote the plan because it is easy to explain . It is also the most expensive plan and the one that pays the highest commission . Just last week I showed a couple in south Georgia how they could save over $ 1700 per year by making a simple change in coverage .
The best place to get a Medigap plan in Georgia is through an Agent that is Independent and working for you . A great benefit of a Medigap plan is that the level of coverage is standardized by the government . Every Insurance Company is offering the same level of coverage using letters A through N . The major difference being the price of the plan as each company offer a different price for the same amount of coverage . A good Independent Agent will have many companies to look at and be able to discuss the best price offer . This best price is not always based on the current rates for your age . They need to be able to discuss the company 's pricing history at ages down the road . You do not want a company that lures you in with a low initial premium and then historically raises it as you get older . You should consider the Customer Service of the Insurance Company and look for a responsive company that answers your questions and can work with your agent . Your agent should be able to help over the phone or be there in person if needed .
The best Medigap coverage is the plan that is right for your needs and budget . Most people buy Medicare supplement plan F because that is the only one that is explained to them . In Georgia there are 11 different Medigap plans but there are only 2 or 3 you really need to consider and something other than plan F is almost always a better financial choice .
There are many websites that offer you the chance to see free life insurance quotes by inputting your information . That is a good place to find life insurance in Georgia . Be sure that the website uses privacy measures and has good reviews . Getting referrals or looking at blogs is another way to find a good life insurance agency in Georgia , as is reading answers from a website like this one .
If life insurance proceeds in Georgia are left to a person as beneficiary , creditors can not take the money away from the beneficiary to pay the debts of the insured , -LRB- unless the beneficiary was co-signer to that debt -RRB- . If the life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , then creditors in Georgia can access those benefits to pay off the debt owed them by the deceased .
Some Blue Cross plans will write life insurance , usually through a sister company . In South Carolina life insurance policies are issued through Companion Life Insurance Company . In Georgia , life insurance policies are written by Greater Georgia Life Insurance Company , Some Blue Cross companies are stock carriers , others are mutual , and a few are not-for-profit companies .
Medigap plan F is , in my opinion , the most overpriced , oversold Medicare supplement plan on the market . In Georgia Medicare supplement plan F for a 65 year old ranges in price from $ 118 to $ 249 . They are all identical in every way except price . When you pay more you do n't get more , you simply paid too much .
Medigap insurance rates vary by age , gender , zip code , tobacco use , plan design and carrier . Since all plans with the same letter are identical in every way except premium rate , you should consider lower cost carriers . Here in Georgia plan F for a 65 year old can range from $ 120 to over $ 200 per month . Shop around . When you pay more you do n't get more you simply paid too much .
As far as I know , any carrier that offers Medicare supplement plans in your state will also include plan F. For a lot of reasons , Medigap plan F is the most popular plan sold -LRB- and purchased -RRB- . Every statistic I have seen shows Medicare supplement plan F participation in excess of 50 % and usually closer to 70 % . In other words , for every 100 Medicare supplement plans bought in a state , 50 - 70 are plan F . While F is the most popular plan , it does not mean it has the best value . Most of my Georgia Medicare supplement clients purchase plan G and enjoy saving $ 300 or more each year vs. what they were paying for plan F with another carrier .
Original Medicare has the same benefits whether you are here in Georgia where I am or in Alaska , Hawaii or Maine . Medicare supplement plans also are identical in every state with regard to plan design . On the other hand , Medicare Advantage plans will vary within a state and from state to state .
Original Medicare follows you anywhere you go , whether moving within the state or out of state . Same is true for your Medicare supplement plan . If you purchase a Medigap plan here in Georgia and move to Texas you can take that plan with you . Medicare Advantage plans are required to drop your coverage if you move outside of their service area .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Life Insurance Policy Pays Dividends ?
Paying life insurance dividends can be paid on any type of policy from any participating life insurance carrier . The most common companies that pay dividends are called mutual insurance companies . Some of the more common names of mutual insurance companies are State Farm , NY Life and Northwestern Mutual . Mutual insurance companies consider the policyholders part owners of the company and share a portion of the profits as dividends . You may or may not receive a benefit based on the year 's profits . You may find mutual company premiums a bit more expensive than none mutual companies with an expectation of paying their dividends . When purchasing a life insurance policy you should find the best product at the best price to cover your unique situation , not on who pays a dividend or not .
A dividend is a portion of the insurance company 's profits that you receive just by having a participating policy with that company . Policies that pay dividends are usually participating Whole Life . Dividends are not guaranteed , because they are only paid if the company makes money that year . But they are not taxed , because rather than looking at them as profit to you , they are looked as a refund for over payment of premium .
Any life insurance policy that is participating can pay dividends . The most ubiquitous type of life insurance to pay dividends is whole life insurance , but it is not the only type f life insurance that can be participating -LRB- pays dividends -RRB- . It 's important to note that just because a policy is participating , there is no guarantee that it will pay dividends in any given year . Dividends are paid as a result of surplus -LRB- excess earnings -RRB- with the insurer on the product issued .
By IRS definition Life Insurance Dividends are considered a return of `` unused premium '' and not subject to income tax as they have already been taxed going in as premium . Mutual companies pay dividends to policyholders as they have no stockholders as owners of the company . The permanent policyholders -LRB- not term , not universal life policyholders -RRB- are considered the owners of the company and dividends are applied to their whole life policies . A dividend for a mutual life insurance company is a combination of investment return , positive mortality experience -LRB- fewer deaths than expected -RRB- and operating expense savings and what is held as surplus by the company . Money beyond what the company needs or projects is returned to whole life policyholders in that form of a dividend . The surplus is what protects the company if for some reason they goof . Most mutual companies have been paying dividends consistently for more than a century .
Any life insurance policy that is participating can pay dividends . The most ubiquitous type of life insurance to pay dividends is whole life insurance , but it is not the only type f life insurance that can be participating -LRB- pays dividends -RRB- . It 's important to note that just because a policy is participating , there is no guarantee that it will pay dividends in any given year . Dividends are paid as a result of surplus -LRB- excess earnings -RRB- with the insurer on the product issued .
There are three different types of companies that sell life insurance . Stock companies , which pay profits to stockholder aft expenses , fraternal 's that have a common membership and profits are used to provide extra benefits for the members , and mutual companies that pay excess profits back to the policy holder in the form of dividends . Dividends then are the excess profit a mutual company pays . You will have three options with a company that pays dividends : You can leave them to accumulate interest , but you may have to pay tax on the interest , you can allow them to buy additional paid up insurance , this is the one I usually recommend . This helps increase your death benefit thus allowing for inflation . The third option is using them to reduce premium , thus in some case depending on the dividends paid the dividends will eventually be making your premium payments for you . Dividends are not guaranteed .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
Life insurance dividend options tell the insurance company what you want to do with the dividend that is paid on a participating policy . Options depend on the company , but the most common options are : - Paid-up additions - where divididends are used to purchase paid up additions - Accumulate at interest - dividends are placed into an account at the insurance company and they earn a specificed interest rate set by the company - Reduce premium - dividends are used to pay down the premium or cover the entire premium due if the dividend is large enough to cover the premium - Purchase one year term insurance - the dividend purchases term insurance to increase total death benefit - Cash - the policy holder is simply paid the dividend as a check
Paying life insurance dividends can be paid on any type of policy from any participating life insurance carrier . The most common companies that pay dividends are called mutual insurance companies . Some of the more common names of mutual insurance companies are State Farm , NY Life and Northwestern Mutual . Mutual insurance companies consider the policyholders part owners of the company and share a portion of the profits as dividends . You may or may not receive a benefit based on the year 's profits . You may find mutual company premiums a bit more expensive than none mutual companies with an expectation of paying their dividends . When purchasing a life insurance policy you should find the best product at the best price to cover your unique situation , not on who pays a dividend or not .
The face amount of the policy represents the face amount the policy is scheduled to pay out . In the case of a graded death benefit the policy will pay a reduced amount for the first 2 or three policy years before going to the actual face amount . Some companies pay dividends . These dividends can be used to buy additional insurance thus increasing the death benefit . But dividends are not guaranteed Should you die the beneficiary would receive the Face amount of the policy plus any paid up insurance accumulated by the dividends . In the case of a Universal Life policy , the policy would pay the face amount plus if you choose you can have the death benefit increased by any cash value accumulated in the policy . Because of the nature of Universal Life you need to make sure you are paying sufficient premium to keep the policy in force , otherwise the policy would lose the death benefit entirely . Always read your annual statement if you have a Universal Life policy .
A participating whole life insurance policy has the potential to generate an annual dividend . It can also have the potential to generate a terminal dividend at the surrender of the policy . Dividends are not guaranteed . A dividend is the return of unused premium to the policy owner . Because dividends are considered return of unused premiums , they are not taxed up to basis . Dividends can be taken in cash and used in a verity of internal policy rider applications : term insurance paid up additional insurance , to reduce premiums , to pay premiums , etc. .
The type of life insurance that pays a dividend is called a participating policy . Dividends are paid when the insurance company makes a profit and , in essence , shares them with its policyholders . The type of life insurance company that offers participating policies that pay dividends is called a mutual company . The type of policy that pays a dividend is usually Whole Life .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
No , Term Life Insurance does not pay dividends . It also does not have cash value , and if you quit paying on a Term Life policy , the policy will end without any surrender value . Universal Life Insurance and non-participating Whole Life also do not pay dividends . Only `` participating Whole Life '' pays dividends .
Though no longer common in US participating whole life insurance , a terminal dividend is an additional policy dividend paid to the policy-holder at policy maturity in addition to annual policy dividends . Mutual insurers -LRB- those owned by policy-holders -RRB- used to have such terminal `` bonus '' dividends on some whole life policies under certain conditions .
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
Life insurance dividends are paid on par life insurance plans . Most par plans are some form of permanent life insurance but term policies can pay dividends as well . Dividends result from the insurance carrier `` overcharging '' you so any dividend is considered a return of premium and is normally not subject to taxation .
Life insurance policy dividends can be found on policies which `` participate '' in policy holder dividends which is the divisible surplus of the carrier . These policy dividends are most often associated with participating whole life -LRB- par whole life -RRB- and can be issued by mutual or stock insurance companies . All mutuals have par policies but only a few stock companies have par whole life in their portfolios . This `` return of premium '' is made up of excess investment , mortality , expense and persistency . Dividends are never guaranteed and may be less than projected , especially in times like these where interest rates have fallen and stayed at historic lows .
I am sorry for your loss , and pray that you find comfort during this time . You have asked a great question . I 'm going to hazard a guess and say that the policy has been in force for many years . Over that time , the amount paid into the policy has exceeded whatever the face value of the policy is , the company pays the occasional dividend , or both . In any case , the cash value has grown to exceed the stated benefit value of the policy . I have policies that are the same way ; my Dad was wise and loved us enough to buy policies for us with what at the time were adequate face values . Over the years , what I 've paid on the policy has been supplemented by dividends paid by the insurance company . The cash value is about triple the face value . But if you look at the monthly statement , I will bet you will see what I see on mine - the death benefit is equal to the face value + the excess cash value , minus any unpaid loans or owed premium . My bet is the policy is written with a company that has been fiscally prosperous , and paid steady dividends to the policy . Your loved one made a wise decision purchasing this policy . May God bless and keep you in your time of sorrow , and thank you for asking .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Physical Damage Coverage In Auto Insurance ?
Physical damage is damage to your vehicle . If the damage is sustained in a collision , the applicable portion of an auto policy would be the collision coverage which repairs your vehicle after you meet a stated deductible amount . If the car is damaged by other means , the coverage applicable is called comprehensive . It works the same way but generally has a different deductible amount stated .
There are two primary elements of coverage provided in a typical car insurance policy . One element is Liability coverage which provides protection for you if you cause injury or damage to someone else or their property . The Physical Damage element provided Collision as well as non-collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- damage coverage for your car .
Auto insurance can provide you protection from physical damage and liability losses depending on the amounts and types of coverage that you choose . The basics for auto insurance coverage options are bodily injury -LRB- this is normally injuries that another person sustains when you are involved in an accident and deemed responsible -RRB- , property damage -LRB- damage done to property from an auto accident that you are deemed responsible for -RRB- , medical payments -LRB- amount available for your medical treatment when involved in an accident -RRB- , uninsured motorist -LRB- coverage that provides for damages when you are involved in an accident with an uninsured motorist -RRB- , under-insured motorist -LRB- this coverage comes into play if you are involved in an accident and the responsible party for the accident does not have enough coverage to provide for all of the damages caused by the accident -RRB- , other than collision `` comprehensive '' -LRB- this is physical damage coverage for your vehicle typically less a deductible -RRB- , and collision -LRB- this is a physical damage coverage for your vehicle typically less a deductible -RRB- .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
There are essentially two parts to an auto insurance policy . Liability coverage , or as some refer to it as PL/PD and physical damage coverage . Most states require some form of liability coverage in order to drive your vehicle legally . But physical damage is an optional coverage you can purchase to protect your vehicle . The most common coverage you will find under the physical damage is comprehensive and collision coverage . Where collision coverage covers just that , collision with another vehicle , comprehensive coverage picks up other than collision coverages . Comprehensive provides coverage for losses from fire , theft , hail , falling objects , glass breakage and car/animal accidents . Comprehensive provides coverage for loss or damage to your vehicle and its equipment cause by theft , larceny or robbery . It also provides coverage in the event you are tricked into giving your vehicle to another person under false pretenses . Please note that you are subject to your deductible in the event of a loss . What this means is that the insurance company will pay you for the loss less your deductible which may range from $ 0 to $ 500 dollars depending on your insurance carrier . To stay competitive some insurance companies may offer special perks in their auto coverage such as waiving the deductibles or providing additional coverage such as rental car coverage in the event of theft . So be sure to check with your insurance agent or carrier to see if they provide this coverage .
There are 4 major potential losses that your auto policy protects you from : Bodily Injury , Property damage , Personal Injury , and physical damage to your vehicle . Let 's take a quick look at these . Be advised that I 'm speaking specifically for the state of Michigan . Your state may be slightly different . Bodily Injury - In Michigan if you injure someone in an auto crash , you can be sued for : Wrongful Death Disfigurement Loss of Bodily Function Loss of Wages These lawsuits are big dollars . Be sure you 're carrying high enough limits to protect your assets Property Damage - If you cause damage to property with your car , you can be sued to repair or replace that property Personal Injury - This is an injury to the driver and any passengers in the car . In Michigan , there is unlimited lifetime coverage for this . Check in your state for it 's specific limit . Physical Damage to your auto - This is the coverage that will fix your car for a covered accident . One last item I 'll cover is Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverage . This is a coverage you carry that will pay you if you are injured in a car accident and the at fault driver either has no insurance or not enough to pay what you 've won in court . I did n't touch on things like towing or rental reimbursement as I did n't really think that was what you were asking , but those coverages are also available as well as some other small , specialized coverages . the auto insurance policy is a complicated animal and you need an agent you can trust to be sure you build the right coverage in a way that you can afford it .
Auto glass is covered on an auto insurance policy as long as you carry physical damage coverage . Physical damage coverage would be comprehensive or collision . If the car is in an accident and the glass is broken collision would pick up the damage minus yourcollisiondeductible . If the damage came from a non collision related incident such as a rock hitting thewindshieldor vandalism for example these types of situations would fall under comprehensive coverage . Many insurance carriers now offer zero -LRB- 0 -RRB- deductible for glass on the comprehensive deductible . For example : you could purchase a $ 500.00 deductiblefor any comprehensive loss on your auto policy but have a zero -LRB- 0 -RRB- deductible if the comprehensive loss was glass . Usually a slight extra premium applies for this coverage . Talk to your local agent to see if this is an option available in your area .
I think Cathy gave you a good answer . If I could , I might just expand to say , that in the first half of the twentieth century there were two types of auto insurance policies one for liability issues and one for physical damage issues . In fact many insurance agents of that era started working as physical damage agents connected with an auto retail dealer . Over time the notion became that one could buy Liability and Physical damage coverage which was then considered to be `` full coverage ' '' or cover more fully your exposures rather than buying only a liability policy . Those days are long gone and now most insurers cover a multitude of coverage types . My advice to anyone looking to properly insure your exposure to loss is to consider buying all the coverages you can . In the process of considering coverage ask an agent to explain how that particular coverage works . Education of the public is just one thing a good agent does whether they sell a policy or not .
This one is really dependent upon the circumstances and where you live . I can only speak to how Michigan will treat it . Since we 're a No-Fault state , if your car is damaged , your insurance will cover the damage to your car -LRB- if you have physical damage coverage -RRB- . If you do n't carry physical damage coverage you can sue for up to $ 1,000 in small claims court . Now , most people in Michigan have coverage for this under their policies and will pay it out without going to court . You simply contact their company , explain the circumstances and submit a police report showing their driver is at fault . They usually pay these very quickly . If it 's not for physical damage to a car , you may be able to do the same thing , but the outcome may be very different . If it 's for property damage or an injury , they may or may not work with you . It 's very possible you may have to sue the other driver to recover any damages . Remember , their insurance company represents their driver , not you . I would advise my clients to get an estimate on any damage to a car and to consult a doctor with any injury . Then , depending on what you find out , make a determination on whether it 's worth pursuing . Any time you sue , there 's a lot of time and energy involved and the outcome is not certain . You need to be able to put a dollar amount on it before you proceed . Get your ducks in a row first , then you 'll be in a much better position .
Maybe . There are several sections to an auto policy . Your insurance policy will have at least one of the sections but will not necessarily have all of them . Section V in most policies describes the coverage for physical damage . A scratch on your car is physical damage . This is further divided into Comprehensive coverage which would address your scratch if the vehicle was not in a collision . The other coverage is collision . Your policy may have comprehensive but not collision insurance , or the reverse . If you have physical damage coverage there will be a deductible identified which must be satisfied before the insurance company pays anything . These deductibles are not necessarily going to be equal .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Liability insurance in an auto policy refers to coverage for bodily injury or property damage . This is what happens in a collision . It is separate from the physical damage coverage which can also be in an auto policy . This coverage covers your car and the damage it sustains . Bodily Injury and property damage liability are by far the most important part of your auto policy . If someone is hurt in an accident and you are at fault , the claim is going to be enormous . It will be much more than you could possibly handle with your normal cash flow .
Automobiles have been insured in the US since the late 1890 's and with good reason . Americans love to drive and it became obvious early on in the use of cars , that they could cause great injury and property damage so evolved the early auto insurance . As cars themselves became more costly the need for physical damage coverage also became necessary since folks could not buy the car all at once and lenders required protection for their collateral . Even into the mid twentieth century it was not uncommon to have a different agent and or company to handle liability and physical damage coverage . As the industry grew there was and there is a better recognition that major personal injury or fatality could be caused by cars.States also then became the conveyor of the right to be on the roads and so it became necessary to be able to post a bond that you would pay damages caused by you and your auto or provide assurance to the rest of the world that you have a capacity to pay for damages through an insurance policy . So insurance has responded to what society has thought was a basic tenant of responsibility and this has been codified in most states with expectations of the minimum amount of coverage you must have to be authorized to drive in the specific state . Some folks might suggest to you that all insurance is alike and therefore is a commodity . Do n't be drawn into that false premise . Every one has different asserts to protect and specific needs that only can only be addressed with good active communication with your company or agent .
The portion of an auto policy that covers damage caused by hitting a deer is the `` Comprehensive '' portion of the physical damage coverage . Physical damage coverage for your car is divided into two portions : Collision and Comprehensive . Collision is the more narrowly defined of the two and provides coverage if your car is damaged as a result of hitting another car , a stationary object or a human.Comprehensive covers everything else , for example , a deer strike , vandalism , somethig falling on it while parked , etc. .
If you want to properly protect yourself then yes . Your regular auto insurance will typically extend your liability coverage to any vehicle that you driving . It will not however provide any physical damage coverage for the rented vehicle . The optional insurance will typically provide some physical damage coverage and also coverage for the rental company 's lost revenues and other expenses that you would be responsible for if the vehicle was damaged and you did not have the coverage .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
Yes , there is a policy that is called a non-owned auto policy . This type of policy will only provide liability coverage not physical damage coverage . This means that the policy will typically provide coverage when you are involved in an accident and you are deemed responsible for the damage caused . It will typically not however cover any physical damage to the vehicle that you are driving .
Full coverage on auto insurance covers the physical damage done to YOUR vehicle . Liability coverage only will cover claims brought against you in an accident . `` Full coverage '' has two parts , comprehensive coverage -LRB- if a tree falls on your car , or a hail storm does damage to your vehicle , basically most occurrences when you are not in the vehicle -RRB- , and collision coverage , which covers the physical damage done to your vehicle in an accident . You can choose to get comprehensive only , or comprehensive and collision , but not collision without comprehensive . Note : the deductibles for each can be different . You will typically save more money by raising your collision deductible compared to raising your comprehensive deductible .
The best answer I can provide is maybe . It really depends upon what damage is done by the animal and if it is your animal -LRB- i.e. pet -RRB- or a wild animal . Your animal & physical damage to your home : more than likely not , unless your carrier offers an endorsement against owned pet damage . I personally have never heard of this type of coverage , but that does n't mean it can not be found in the surplus lines market . Your animal & physical damage to another person or another home : sometimes yes . I say sometimes because if you have a breed of animal that is notorious for attacking people or causing damage your homeowners insurance will exclude it . However , if you have a breed that is typically docile and it randomly attacks a person or damages another person 's property your liability coverage will take care of it . Wild animal : more than likely not . If it is a rodent/pest then there is more than likely an exclusion in your policy . However , this exclusion might be something you could buy back -LRB- i.e. get coverage for -RRB- so check your policy . If it is something not considered a rodent/pest then it is very doubtful you have any coverage . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Do I Need To Get A Home Insurance Quote ?
It is pretty easy to obtain a quote . Be prepared with the proper address of the property . Pretty detailed information about the house is available in public municipal records , but be prepared tosupply your agent with details : The construction year of the house , where it is in relation to a hydrant or other year round water supply , if the house has special features . Also , tellyour agent if the house has a security alarm.With some companies , it may be beneficial to you if there have been recent upgrades made to the roof , HVAC , plumbing or electrical systems .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are several ways to obtain a quote for homeowners insurance . You may certainly fill out a quote form online ; almost every big name carrier has one on their website/app . The problem with doing a quote yourself is that you are not a licensed insurance agent , you likely do not know what limits you should have . Most online quotes also do not run your credit or loss history , which may have big impacts on your premium . What is the best way to get an accurate quote ? Contact a licensed independent insurance agent and give them your information . Ask questions ! Tell them your story ! Tell them what kinds of things you own ! If you want your assets properly covered more information is better . Most agencies have a form on their website/app a prospect may complete . Otherwise email or call asking for a quote .
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
the most efficient way to get a lower auto insurance quote is to get quotes from several independent auto insurance agents . that way , you 're only contacting a handful of agents but can get quotes from dozens of companies . word of caution : if you 're getting a quote online , make sure the websites you get quotes from have a name , address and phone number listed . If not , you 're quoting with a lead generation site . lead generation sites do not sell insurance . they simply sell your information to insurance agents . you may find the lowest rate this way , but your phone will blow in the process . any legitimate agent will have their info listed on the website .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
You should buy term life insurance from an independent agent because they can review options from multiple companies . Captive agents generally only offer you their company first before looking at other options . Some people prefer to buy online so they `` do n't have to be bothered '' with the process of buying insurance . However , this can often result in you not getting the best product for your needs because you do n't know what risk class you would qualify for from each company . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines and not every company is going to offer you the same risk class - e.g. company A could offer preferred and company B could offer standard . Online instant quotes only provide numbers based off of given criteria and there 's no guarantee you would qualify for it - in short , they are just rough estimates . You need to understand what risk class you would most likely qualify for from each company before applying - simply put , not everyone gets the preferred plus rates -LRB- which is what many people will quote themselves when running instant online quotes -RRB- . Also , applying to multiple companies at the same time can often work against you . Independent agents can help you through every step of the process in great detail and provide you with much more accurate quotes than what you may be looking at on your own . If I can help you out with your life insurance needs or if you have any other questions , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Health insurance for small businesses works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you will need to consult with an experienced health insurance broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help -LRB- we can help you get your company 's group health insurance set up -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Homeowners Insurance rates are based on ` RISK ' ! The risk is inclusive of the Reconstruction Value of the home , the age of the home , the geographic location of the home , the additional endorsements required by the customer and the deductible chosen . The first step is to calculate the reconstruction value , the next step is to select the requested endorsements and deductible and the third step is to qualify the home before generating the associated rate . Many carriers require the home to be within a certain distance of a fire station , fire hydrant and have protective features . Many carriers will not accept a home where certain animals known to have anaggressivetemperament reside . For a quote in AZ , CA , NV , you may obtain a quote at : WEBSITELINK For other States , you may wish to find a local agent to assist with a quote !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Insurance quotes are a very detailed process which will require first finding out which insurance companies write policies in your area . Contacting insurance agents local to your area is the best way tO search . I always feel quoting with more than one insurance carrier is best . An independent agent in your area can usually quote you for three or more carriers at one time . Also , if you search for independent agents online that write insurance in your state you can get multiple quotes . Once you select an agent , you will be asked for personal information , claims history , and information specific to the home . The more you know about your home the better off you will be . Additionally , remember to get replacement cost coverage , a water backup endorsement if you have a basement , schedule any valuable personal property especially jewelry , and ask about any other coverage endorsements they have available . Request the quote in writing , so that you have the ability to review the coverage and its associated cost .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
The quote engine on my website quotes to $ 5,000,000 . You can input the gender , ages , build , and health conditions of the persons you are looking to cover to get an idea of what the premiums will be for them . Take the result times 2.35 to get the approximate premium for $ 12,000,000 . My expertise is in finding the best health rating and price for each person . Whenever you are looking at more than one person , there is a health factor involved , that possibly , not even the applicant is aware they have . After 12 years of finding the best quotes for hundreds of impaired risk applicants each month , I can definitely help you in that crucial and foundational step . After finding your best carrier , I would work with the `` big case '' department of that company to knock out the details . They know all the ropes so you can get the rate you qualify for . I am connected with a prestigious brokerage whose reps will bend over backwards to help get this done in the smoothest possible fashion . If you would like my personal assistance , I would be happy to help . As you can see , there are several good agents who put a lot of time answering consumer questions on this website , and I 'm sure that all of us are qualified in different ways , to pull this off for you . While we love to do this as a service , it is always a joy when one of our answers prompts someone to contact us .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Homeowners Insurance Based On ?
The actuary is a person in an insurance company that compiles mountains of data from previous claims . From this information they develop a standard rate . The underwriter is a person in the insurance company that reviews the application to see if it meets the requirement of the standard rate . The underwriter may adjust the rate further or decline a home based upon their review . The standard rate is based on the location of the dwelling , the construction of the dwelling , the cost to replace the dwelling , and the presence of unusual hazards -LRB- trampolines , swimming pools and derelict autos . -RRB- One factor that few consider is the presence of a pet . Some pets have a statistically significant risk of lawsuit . Another hazard is the placement of an evaporative cooler . When they are located on the roof they frequently result in water damage claims . Another consideration is the pitch of the roof . As you can see there are a number of variables that the underwriter must consider . That is why they frequently request photographs of the house .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
A homeowners policy will cover damages caused by fire to the building , and the contents . It will also pay for debris removal . There will be coverage for additional living costs while the structure is being repaired . Other coverages might come into play such as building ordinance coverage , and fire department fee coverage . Recovery will be based on the form that was used for the homeowners policy . It will either be based on replacement cost or the actual cash value of what was damaged . The recovery will also be reduced by the deductible .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Homeowners insurance is important part of helping to protect yours ' and your family financial futures . A home is a huge investment without homeowners insurance how will you rebuild after a fire or tornado . How will your protect your assets if someone is hurt on your property if you do n't have homeowners insurance ? This is just a couple of the coverages that are provided by homeowners insurance . To find out more about what a homeowners insurance policy has to offer contact your local agent .
The homeowners policy is an extremely popular insurance plan . The primary reason is its acceptance by lenders . It is a formula based package based upon the replacement cost for the home . Personal property and other coverages then have limits that are a percentage of the replacement cost for the home . An extremely important part of the homeowners policy is the liability section which provides coverage for bodily injury and property damage . A lawsuit can bankrupt you so this coverage is vital .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
It will all depend . Any vehicle that pays you an interest rate is tied to a certain index . The interest rate will change according to that index . Annuities set their rates based on what Insurance companies feel is a reasonable rate of return based on their investment portfolio . These rates are typically fixed for a certain period of time and traditionally have been better than what banks and CD 's have been able to offer . When shopping for an annuity to purchase check out the Insurance companies you wish to invest in and make a purchase based on what you like about the company and their investment strategies .
Thereare a fewdifferent types of homeowners insurance policys out there and eachinsurance company in Nevadaoffer different coverages and limits in these policys . The most common homeowners policy used is called a HO4 policy which pretty much all major insurance companies are using . This type of policy means that any peril will be covered unless it is excluded on the policy . These exclusions are pretty standard in Nevadawhich someexamples would be earthquake , war , riot and nuclear warfare . This policy provides coverage for spearate structures , personal property , building codes , Loss of Use , medical and personal liability . The limits for these coverages are a percentage based off the amount that is determined to rebuild the home . If you would like to know more about what a homeowners policy covers please contact me and I will be happy to explain any of these in more detail .
Insurance companies offer homeowners ' insurance policies to people who own and occupy their residence . Once foreclosure occurs , you may occupy your residence but you no longer own it . If you are allowed to remain in the home for a period of time , you may be able to contact your insurer , explain the circumstances and have your policy amended to a Tenant Homeowner form . Tenant homeowner policies are issued to people who occupy a residence but do n't own it . The coverage is similar to homeowners ' insurance except it does n't cover the structure . It covers certain damage to your personal property , additional living expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and your have to live in temporary quarters while it is being repaired and certain personal liability exposures . You may need to adjust the amount of insurance on your personal property be consistent with what it would cost you to replace all your personal things . If you move to a rented home or apartment , you may be able to amend your homeowners ' policy to a Tenant Homeowners ' form and amend the address to that of your new residence .
We will begin to answer this question with the following caution : when one asks about a policy being ` cheaper ' than another -LRB- especially when it is the first question asked -RRB- , the immediate concern arises regarding the lack of importance of the coverage which is the primary reason for purchasing the insurance . To answer the question correctly , Homeowners Insuranceand Landlords Insuranceare not related in any way other than to provide property coverage on a similar dwelling . TheHomeowners Insurance policy is defined and writtenfor the Owner Occupied home of the titled owner of the property ; the Landlords Insurance policy is defined and written for the Tenant Occupedhome of the titled owner of the property . Each policy contract contains an Occupancy Clause stating the occupancy of thedwelling insured . We have witnessed large losses which have been denied by carriers due to the occupancy not matching the policy purpose . Therefore , if you have a tenant occupied home , you will need to purchase a Landlords Policy and if you are seeking to insure your primary home , you should purchase a Homeowners Policy . The LandlordsPolicy statistically poses a greater risk factor to the insurance company ; however generally , the LandlordsPolicy does not provide coverage for personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- and provides a more limited form of Liability Coverage listed as Premises OnlyLiability . Now , regarding cost , the premium is specific to the carrier 's experience with each type of policy.There are insurance carriers that have a much worse historic experience on tenant occupied properties ; thus , the Landlords Policy would be rated as a higher risk than the Homeowners Policy . However , in most cases , for the same Dwelling Coverage amount , we find that the Landlords Policy Premium islower than the Homeowners Policy . Awise word to the public would be to purchase the correct coverage for the application since if a futureclaim is denied based on the incorrect policy form being purchased , the whole purpose of the insurance is void and unnecessary . For more information regaring Homeowners Insurance , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
The only way to receive accurate estimates for yourself is to contact a few insurance agents in the area you 're considering purchasing a home . An insurance agent can provide a quote for a property you 're considering purchasing . Home insurance rates can vary greatly based on geographic location , the individual home and the individual homeowner . The average monthly cost of 20 homeowners in Austin TX might be $ 100/month , but the average monthly cost of 20 homeowners in Houston TX might be $ 200/month because of the greater risk of hurricanes .
If your homeowners insurance is escrowed do n't sweat it . Typically switching carriers for your homeowners insurance coverage from one carrier to another is fairly seamless and can be handled by your local agent . Depending on the carrier they may require a payment on the new policy to get things started . Your current carrier should refund any unused portion of premium . Your mortgage lender may change your escrow amount based on the new premium and the timing of the start of the new policy in comparison to the homeowners insurance renewal date .
In general , no , home insurance will not cover wet rot . A homeowners policy is there to protect you from the sudden and accidental , not the ongoing . To file a claim , you have to be able to pinpoint what happened and when it happened . Wet rot describes a long time , ongoing circumstance . Your homeowners policy is designed to make you whole after an `` occurrence '' . It 's not designed to maintain your home . If you have a condition that could , potentially , damage your home , it 's the homeowners responsibility to correct that condition to protect your home from future damage . This brings up the question of the cost of your homeowners insurance . Every claim impacts the loss ratio of your company and , ultimately , your rates . Want to control the cost of your homeowners insurance ? Take a higher deductible and pay for the smaller things yourself . You 'll save money in the long run .
Unless you are operating a home based business , homeowners and renters insurance is not a deductible expense . If you are operating a home based business you may be able to deduct a portion of the insurance as a business expense under Schedule C. Check with your tax adviser to see if you qualify and what portion you may claim .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medicare Cover For Eyeglasses ?
Medicare is not designed to cover routine eye exams or corrective lenses . You may want to consider a supplemental policy which may make payments for exams and provide discounts for glasses , contact lenses , etc. . Eye exams and certain corrective intraocular lenses may be covered if needed to correct an underlying medical condition such as glaucoma , and cataracts .
Medicare does n't pay for glasses . In short , you will need to secure coverage under a separate vision insurance plan to receive benefits for glasses , contacts , and other routine services . Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high-risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits .
Some things associated with vision are covered under Medicare and some are not . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . Even if you start out taking an routine eye exam and it is determined during the exam that you have eye conditions qualifying for Medicare funded treatment , only subsequent exams for those conditions will be covered . Medicare does cover glaucoma testing for those at risk for glaucoma due to certain conditions or family history . It will cover medically prescribed exams , testing , and treatments for eye conditions that result from illness or injury . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses . It will cover an IOL following a cataract surgery and eyeglass as a prosthesis during cataract surgery recovery .
Medicare Part B does not cover routine vision exams and eyeglasses . However ... Prescription eyeglasses with standard frames -LRB- or one set of contact lenses -RRB- is covered by Medicare after cataract surgery that implants an intraocular lens . In addition to the above requirement , Medicare will only pay for contact lenses or eye glasses if you purchase from a supplier who is enrolled in Medicare . You are responsible for paying 20 % of the Medicare - approved amount , and the Part B deductible also applies . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance , the Part B deductible and co-insurance may be covered .
Medicare does not cover periodic eye exams for vision testing and does not cover eyeglasses , in most cases . Medicare will pay for one pair of eyeglasses following cataract surgery in which an introcular lens was implanted . Medicare will also pay for treatment or surgery by a medical doctor for eye disease .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for eyeglasses . The only situation in which eyeglasses are covered by Medicare is when cataract surgery is done . Then it will pay for one standard pair of glasses following surgery . To find out what amount is allowed for that expenditure you can ask your Medicare provided or call 1-800-MEDICARE .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
Medicare will cover anything wrong with your eyes medically -LRB- cataracts , glaucoma , macular degeneration , etc -RRB- . When you have your eyes examined Medicare does not cover the part of the exam called refraction to see if your prescription needs to be changed . My eye doctor charges $ 35 for refraction . Most of your eye exam will be covered by Medicare Part B , 80 % then the other 20 % if you have a Medicare Supplement . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses unless you are getting a new prescription as a result of cataract surgery .
Medicare does not normally pay for glasses . However , after cataract surgery where an intraocular lens has been implanted , Medicare Part B will pay for one set of standard glasses through a supplier enrolled in Medicare . In other situations , Medicare Part B unfortunately does not cover the cost of eyeglasses or contact lenses .
Medicare Part B does not pay for routine eye exams -LRB- eye refractions -RRB- for the purpose of testing eyesight and prescribing eyeglasses . Medicare does pay for eye exams in some situations . 1 -RRB- An annual test for diabetic retinopathy is covered annually for all those who have diabetes . 2 -RRB- Glaucoma tests are covered once every 12 months for those who are at high risk for glaucoma . High risk patients include those who are diabetic , have a family history of glaucoma , are African-American and over age 50 , or are Hispanic and over age 65 . 3 -RRB- Some people with Age-Related Macular Degeneration are covered for various tests .
Yes , Medicare Part A does cover medically necessary cataract surgery , if you must be admitted to the hospital for the surgery to be performed . If on an outpatient basis , cataract surgery is covered by Medicare Part B. Medicare Part B will cover one pair of eyeglasses following the cataract surgery .
Eyeglasses are personal property and the Renters Policy pays for personal property damaged by covered perils so in that sense , yes , eyeglasses are covered by the Renters Policy . They would also be covered by a Homeowner Policy and a Condo Policy . However , all those policies come with a deductible . A deductible is money you pay toward a claim . The insurance company pays the excess . Say , for example , it costs $ 300 to replace glasses that were damaged by a covered peril , like a fire . If you had a $ 250 deductible , you would only recover $ 50 . I would suggest , you not submit the claim . Most insurance companies have a threshold of two claims in three years . After two claims in three years , your policy will not be renewed and because insurance companies share claim information , you will not get a competitive offer from any standard insurance company . You will end up paying much , much more money for the same coverage . My advice is to raise your deductible as high as you can tolerate and save your insurance for real disasters . Your question is important and I hope I 've answered it to your satisfaction . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Its no problem . I answer questions like this all the time . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Medicare does not pay for routine eye exams or corrective lenses . But if you have vision issues , such as glaucoma or cataracts , Medicare will cover at least a portion of your treatment . Medicare will pay for some of the cost of eyeglasses following cataract surgery . Your Medicare approved supplier that accepts assignment can tell you how much the Medicare allowance is for your eyewear .
Medicare covers testing for eye conditions if suspected -LRB- not as part of a routine exam -RRB- , treatment for eye conditions that are a result of illness or injury , intraocular lenses following cataract surgery , one pair of glasses after cataract surgery , glaucoma screening for those with risk factors , and eye prosthesis for absent or shrinking eye . For Medicare covered eye surgery stipulations , see WEBSITELINK . Medicare does not normally cover routine eye exams , testing or eyeglasses .
Medicare does not cover routine eye exams or corrective lenses , but there are situations where they will cover eyeglasses . If you have had cataract surgery and need special glasses , Medicare normally pays for your glasses . You should pick a Medicare approved DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- supplier that accepts assignment in order to minimize your out of pocket exposure .
No , unfortunately , refraction is not covered by Medicare . Refraction , or the part of the eye exam in which you look at a chart of letters while looking into a machine called a phoroptor , is usually used to determine the need for eyeglasses . Medicare considers this a routine procedure and therefore does not cover it , even though at times refraction is used for medical purposes .
Routine eye exams and eyeglasses are generally not a covered item under Medicare . If you have had cataract surgery , speciall corrective lenses are usually a covered medical expense with your Medicare plan . If you contact an approved Medicare supplier , they can tell you how much Medicare will pay towards the cost of eyewear . Go to Medicare.gov and search for `` Supplier Directory ''
Most eye surgery is covered by your health insurance plan if the surgery is considered medically necessary . Surgery designed to correct vision that could otherwise be handled with eyeglasses or contacts is normally not a covered expense . If the patient has cataracts that are severe enough as to inhibit vision , your health insurance plan will normally cover surgery . You should consult your eye doctor and insurance carrier before assuming eye surgery is a covered expense .
This is s great question . Medicare alone covers vision on a limited basis . They will cover 1 pair of eyeglasses , standard frame or contact lenses after cataract surgery that implants on intraocular lenses and you are still responsible for 20 % . Many Part C plans will offer more vision benefits .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Yearly Deductible For Medicare Part B ?
The yearly deductible for Medicare Part B in 2013 for most people is $ 147 per year . For those with higher incomes , the yearly deductible is as follows for a single person . Above $ 85,000 to $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per year Above $ 107,000 to $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per year Above $ 160,000 to $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per year Above $ 214,000 - $ 335.70 per year
The Medicare Part B deductible for 2014 is $ 147 . This is different from the Medicare Part B premium that you pay out of your Social Security . Medicare Supplement insurance can help pay your Part B deductible but not your Medicare Part B premium . In 2014 , most people pay $ 104.90 for their Medicare Part B monthly premium .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare Supplement Plan L covers benefits in a unique manner than most other Medicare supplement plans , similar to plan K . This plan covers 100 % of the Medicare Part A coinsurance and , after Medicare benefits are exhausted , hospital costs up to an additional 365 days . The insured is responsible for 75 % of the Medicare Part A deductible , Medicare Part B coinsurance/copayment , the first 3 pints of blood , the Medicare Part A hospice care coinsurance/copayment , and the skilled nursing facility care coinsurance . The Part B deductible , Part B excess charges , and foreign travel emergency benefits are not covered under this plan . After the yearly out-of-pocket limit , $ 2,330 in 2013 , and Part B deductible , $ 147 in 2013 , has been met , the plan will pay for 100 % of covered services for the rest of the calendar year . If you want to secure a plan that offers more comprehensive benefits , you may want to look into a plan F , G , C , or N.
The 2 basic parts of Medicare are part A and part B . If you work 40 quarters -LRB- 10yrs -RRB- part A is paid for , if you have to pay for part A it would cost $ 441 a month while Part B costs $ 104.90 a month and a $ 147 yearly deductible . Part A is the hospitalization portionand it pays 80 % and you are responsible for 20 % . Part B is the outpatient portion -LRB- Dr. Visits -RRB- The minimum yearly cost would be $ 1,259 a year and part B premium goes up if you make over $ 85,000 a year individual $ 170,000 jointly . This is a simplified explanation but should give you a solid foundation .
Original Medicare has a yearly deductible for Part B , the outpatient and doctor portion . Every year the deductible amount changes based on decisions by Congress . Medicare Part A also has a hospital deductible , but it is a per admission deductible -LRB- in Medicare terminology , per benefit period -RRB- . Some Medicare Part C and D plans also have yearly deductibles .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
To the average Medicare recipient , the yearly cost of Medicare Part A is free . If there is a charge due to being ineligible for free Part A , there is a premium of up to $ 441/month . There are deductibles and co-pays for services provided under Medicare Part A. For Part B , the premium to the average Medicare recipient is $ 140.90 / mo. . There is an annual deductible of $ 147/year and 20 % co-pay for services and supplies received .
A Medicare wellness exam is a yearly visit -LRB- conducted with your physician -RRB- available to individuals who have had Medicare Part B for more than 12 months . Your doctor must accept Medicare and assignment for it to be 100 % covered by Medicare . The purpose of a `` wellness '' exam is to create and maintain a prevention plan to help prevent diseases and disabilities that is customized to you -LRB- based on your current health and risk factors -RRB- . During the exam : 1 -RRB- Your doctor will generally have you fill out health risk assessment -LRB- usually a questionnaire -RRB- during the visit 2 -RRB- Review and update your medical history 3 -RRB- Check your vitals -LRB- height , weight , blood pressure , etc. -RRB- 4 -RRB- Check you for any cognitive impairments 5 -RRB- Provide suggestions to help you improve potential problem health areas 6 -RRB- Create a screening schedule for preventative services Please note , however , any additional services that a doctor conducts or orders , may not be covered by the wellness exam benefits and you might have to pay a coinsurance or deductible depending upon what programs you have -LRB- e.g. Parts A , B , and a Medicare supplement , only Part A & B , etc. -RRB-
The yearly deductible for Medicare Part B in 2013 for most people is $ 147 per year . For those with higher incomes , the yearly deductible is as follows for a single person . Above $ 85,000 to $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per year Above $ 107,000 to $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per year Above $ 160,000 to $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per year Above $ 214,000 - $ 335.70 per year
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Women who are age 30-39 can get one baseline mammogram on Medicare . From age 40 on , a yearly mammogram is paid for by Medicare for those who are on Medicare . If a mammogram is needed for diagnostic purposes , it will be covered by Medicare Part B and you would pay the Part B deductible .
Medicare Part A and Part B do not cover the shingles vaccine . The vaccine is covered under Part D , prescription drug coverage . Contact your drug plan to see what your co-pay would be for the shingles vaccine . Medicare Part B will cover a yearly flu shot and the pneumonia vaccine .
Medicare Part A will cover blood tests done as an inpatient in a hospital or skilled nursing or rehab facility , and Part B will cover blood tests done as an outpatient in any setting , when the blood tests are ordered to diagnose or monitor a condition or disease . Medicare Part A and B does not ordinarily cover routine blood screening . However , some preventative screenings have recently been added to the blood tests that are covered under Medicare part B : diabetes screening for those who are high risk for diabetes , one blood test every 5 years to test cholesterol , HIV tests for those who are high risk or pregnant , and prostate cancer screening yearly . For specifics see this brochure : WEBSITELINK
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , your Wellness visit should occur if youve had Part B for longer than 12 months . Prior to this visit , you would of had a Welcome to Medicare preventive visit during your first 12 months on Medicare . The Wellness visit is completed annually . The provider is supposed to ask you to complete a brief questionnaire , called a Health Risk Assessment to help develop a personalized prevention plan . Medicare covers many preventative services and it is during this Wellness visit that you can discuss which ones are right for you . If the doctor accepts Medicare assignment , you pay nothing for the yearly Wellness visit . If additional tests or services are completed during the same visit that are not covered under this benefit , it is possible that you will be responsible for paying co-insurance and the Part B deductible . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
For an endoscopy Medicare would only pay 80 % not 100 % . An endoscopy is a diagnostic test and is paid under Medicare Part B . If you had already met your yearly Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2015 or $ 166 for 2016 -RRB- you should owe nothing for the test . Make sure the doctor who performed the endoscopy submitted a claim to your Medicare Supplement Plan .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Increase Your Auto Insurance Score ?
Great question ! The best way to increase your insurability is to have a clean driving record . Avoiding tickets , accidents and damage claims for an extended period of time demonstrates that you are a careful driver , and that your risks are low . Another thing that will help - keep paying your bills on time , and more than minimum payments if possible . Most insurance companies factor in your credit record into their scores , and a good record there over time demonstrates responsibility also . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
I hope I understand your question correctly . I 'm assuming you 're asking if an insurance company getting your insurance score will show up on your credit report and affect your credit score . In general , no . I can only speak for my own state of Michigan but I 'm pretty sure other states work the same way . An insurance score is different from a credit score . There are many different models to calculate an insurance score and different companies will use different models . When an insurance company orders an insurance score it wo n't affect your credit score like applying for a loan will . If it shows up at all , it will show up as an insurance score and wo n't be used to calculate your credit score . So , do n't be worried if your agent asks for information to order an insurance score . It 's usually one of the largest discounts that a company will offer .
Great Question . what effects your auto insurance score is many factors . 1 . how long you been with your prior company . 2 . what is your current auto liability limits . 3 . your credit score . 4 . your driving record . while not all those factors are the same with every company some companies use them for score and other use other factors always check with the company that is going to insure you auto .
Many auto insurance companies will use credit scores to determine the premium rates to charge . Credit scores have proven to be very effective at predicting future claims . On the flip side auto insurance companies do not report claims data . When your report is accessed by the auto insurance company a soft inquiry is logged . Creditors and credit scores do not see soft inquiries , and therefor do not impact your score .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
The average cost of auto insurance per year is going to vary from state to state and more specifically , person to person . Almost all -LRB- if not all -RRB- insurance companies look at an individuals credit score , among other factors , to determine their ` insurance score ' . If you have a lower insurance score , your premium will be lower and visa versa . It 's very difficult to determine the average without factoring in credit , state , year-make-model of car , how much you drive , and your experience level among a host of other attributes . The state of Oklahoma for example is on average , much higher than the state of Missouri . One of the biggest reasons is due to natural risk , or geographic risk . IE ... more storms in Oklahoma Vs. Missouri . I 'm sure a simple google search would provide an average vs all states and credit scores . Although I would be skeptical of that number generated due to all the variances that determine the price .
Start by understanding what your credit score is and how to improve it . Simple tips from lenders websites can help . my personal experience is that mortgage companies like insurers are trying to assess responsibility in how you live your life . credit scores and insurance scores are measures of that . When you have worked to get ally our credit score with all your `` ducks '' in a row cal the lender and ask .
Insurers typically use insurance scores not credit scores , but they are in-bedded with some of the same information . For most insurers this is one way of measuring your responsibility . Responsibility is a key ingredient in knowing if you understand what risks you are taking . Let me give you an example . Suppose you want to hand the keys of a new Ferrari over to a 16 year old . An insurer is going to look at that and say . . wait a minute , does that driver know how to drive such a powerful and expensive car . Will he or she give someone else the keys and let them drive . will he or she be using the car for delivery of Pizzas . All of those things might require a specific answer . Yet insurance scores give an insurer information on how you have acted in variety of situations and credit is part of that shorthand that conveys to an insurer that you are or are not a generally responsible person . The most accurate measure of how you will drive is how often you will drive . So be sure to add that element to your discussion with an agent . He or she may have polices from insurers who give discounts to those who use a vehicle say less than 4.000 mile s a year . Talk to your agent and give him or her enough information to be able to accurately present you and your exposures to many companies .
No . Getting auto insurance quotes will not affect your credit score . This is a myth that just will not go away ! If you were to apply for multiple credit cards or multiple loans , that would negatively affect your credit score . and because of that , many people make the false assumption that getting quotes with multiple auto insurance companies would also hurt your credit score . But that is simply not true .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Credit reports and scores are commonly used by auto insurance companies when underwriting and pricing the policy premiums . Credit scores have been shown to be highly correlated with future auto insurance claims . However , auto insurance companies do not report premium payment or claims information to the credit bureaus . So there is no direct impact of car insurance on your credit worthiness . However there may be an indirect impact on your credit if you suffer an auto accident while uninsured , or under insured . You may suffer from a loss of income if disabled . There may be extra medical bills , car repair expenses , and other liabilities . Any of these situations could make it difficult to make timely payments on any existing loans or debts . Late payments will certainly hurt your credit .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
Credit scores are often used by auto insurance carriers to determine premium rates . These scores have proven to be predictive of future accident claims . Auto insurance companies use credit reports in underwriting , but they do not report premium payment information to the bureaus . So there is no direct impact on your credit rating if you fail to make premium payments . However there may be a variety of indirect impacts on your score . If you are pulled over and fail to show evidence of insurance you may have to pay a fine . If you have an accident while uninsured , you may face large expenses for repairs , liabilities , medical expenses , and more . These added expenses could easily force you to become delinquent on debts that are reported to credit bureaus .
Auto insurance carriers perform a risk analysis to identify high risk drivers . They will look at your credit rating , age , occupation , place of residence , your driving record , insurance payments -LRB- on time or late -RRB- , marital status , type of car and your sex . Each person is weighed by there own risk factor by the insurance carrier before they give a quote . The auto insurance industry invest more time and research into risk analyst than any other industry and they have found a pattern that relates a low credit score to a high risk driver . Due to this finding the auto insurance carrier can adjust the rate of your premium based on your credit score .
Sometimes applying for Life Insurance can slightly affect your Credit Score . Occasionally some companies will use Credit Score as a determining factor in your Premiums . And they will run your Credit Score to find out what it is . According to Experian `` Inquiries '' account for only 10 % of your Credit Score . And `` Excessive '' inquiries count against you . So unless you have had multiple recent inquiries , a single inquiry from an Insurance Company should not affect it too much according to Experian . However , I am a life insurance specialist , not a credit specialist . Experian , TransUnion , & Equifax all have some good info on their sites about what makes up your score and what can affect it .
Great question ! The answer will make you happy - no , getting quotes will not affect your credit score . Unlike loan inquiries , which can affect your score -LRB- unless you actually get a loan or credit card within 30 days of the initial inquiry , then the credit companies realize you were shopping for the best deal , and do not ding your score -RRB- quotes will have no bearing upon your score at all . The best way to look at it is like this - if it will affect your risk for getting credit , it can hurt your score . If you are protecting your investments or credit , it wo n't . I hope that helps you feel better ! If you need help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Is Car Insurance Required In Pennsylvania ?
It is 100 % Illeagel to drive an uninsured vehicle in the state of Pennsylvania . State minimums for car insurance are 15k/30k for Bodily Injury , 5k for Property Damage and 5k for Medical Payment . All other coverage and limits are optional . However I highly recommend Uninsured -LRB- UM -RRB- and Underinsured Motorist -LRB- UIM -RRB- coverage . This protects You if the person who hits you does n't have insurance or enough insurance to cover Your damages . Go to : WEBSITELINK for more information and some free quotes !
There are a number of agencies represented by contributors to InsuranceLibrary.com that will provide online quotes to Pennsylvania residents . You can look through the leaderboard to see who looks reputable , will provide good customer service , and allows you to and experiment with different quote options . The next step is to email or call the agency to firm up your quote . Any life insurance offered online without any further questions probably is priced higher so that it covers all types of health , or else they can easily decline you . At this point , you can fill out the application in one of several ways : paper , digital , phone , in person . If you are applying for a No Exam policy it could be in effect within hours or days . If one that requires an exam , you will be contacted to do a free exam in your home or other place of your choice , then your application will go through an underwriting review . Some policies are paid for up front , some are paid upon approval , and some are paid after you get the policy in the mail and have looked it over . Some online agencies give you a choice . There are many online agencies that serve Pennsylvania , so be sure to use one that you trust and that will work with you to get your best policy and price .
To get a resident life insurance license in Pennsylvania , you must have a home or office in Pennsylvania , be of good character , be able to read and write and English , and pass the insurance exam . There is a prerequisite of 24 hours of pre-licensing testing , including 3 hours of ethics .
The best Long Term Care Insurance in Pennsylvania is the one that works best for the person buying it . Different companies offer different features , are more favorable to different ages , etc. . Go to a website that offers Long Term Care insurance in Pennsylvania and talk to an agent to be sure you are getting the best price with the best company for your situation .
The best life insurance in Pennsylvania is the one that best fits the budget and needs of the person purchasing it . What works best for a younger person may not even be available to a senior person , and vice versa . To find the best life insurance for you , contact a trusted website that offers life insurance in Pennsylvania , or visit a local agency that offers choices from many companies . Your agent should be able to lead you to a policy with a highly rated company that best suits your budget and needs .
Health insurance rates for one person in Pennsylvania are very affordable . Prices in Pittsburgh , Philadelphia , Harrisburg and most areas of the state are much less expensive than most consumers may realize . Prices can vary between $ 30 per month to much higher amounts , depending on your zip code , type of coverage and company that is providing the coverage . As an experienced Pennsylvania broker -LRB- I have more than 32 years of experience -RRB- , our job is to find the best fit for the consumer . Whether its Aetna , Highmark , UPMC , Independence Blue Cross , Geisinger , or other insurers , we shop so you can save ! By comparing all of the top-rated companies , the customer wins . The Affordable Care Act has changed the landscape of Pa healthcare . Open Enrollments allow individuals to apply for coverage without answering medical questions . Also , a federal subsidy may now reduce the cost of coverage . Sometimes , this reduction is quite substantial .
Pennsylvania offers different types of policies from different companies . What is best for one person may not be at all what is best for another . However , some good features in long term care insurance are the ability to cover all levels of care -LRB- home health , assisted living , adult day care , nursing home -RRB- , having regular increases in coverage to cover the increase in health care costs as the years go on , and possibly a partnership policy that will protect your assets up to the face amount your policy . Again , not all these are best for everyone . Choose a knowledgeable agent to guide you through your long term care choices in Pennsylvania and to help you select your ideal policy for your budget .
Pennsylvania state minimums for car insurance are 15k/30k for Bodily Injury , 5k for Property Damage and 5k for Medical Payment . All other coverage and limits are optional . However I highly recommend Uninsured -LRB- UM -RRB- and Underinsured Motorist -LRB- UIM -RRB- coverage . This protects You if the person who hits you does n't have insurance or enough insurance to cover Your damages . With that being said , the state minimums are very low and people who only carry the minimums often find themselves short changed when it comes time to submit a claim . I do n't think any of us can get any emergency medical treatment for $ 5k these days . The average auto owner in NEPA at least , carries 100/300 BI , 100 PD , 100/300 UM and UIM -LRB- unstacked if your insuring 1 car / stacked if 2 or more -RRB- , 10k Med pay , 250 comp , 500 coll , and most of the first party benefits along with towing and rental . It really is beneficial to speak to an agent about your personal needs so that an appropriate policy can be written to shield those needs ! Go to WEBSITELINK for more information and some free quotes !
In Pennsylvania the minimum liability coverage requirements for auto insurance are : $ 15,000 per incident with a $ 30,000 maximum and a $ 5,000 personal property .
Pennsylvania state minimums for car insurance are 15k/30k for Bodily Injury , 5k for Property Damage and 5k for Medical Payment . All other coverage and limits are optional . However I highly recommend Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverage . This protects You if the person who hits you does n't have insurance or enough insurance to cover Your damages . Go to WEBSITELINK for more information and some free quotes !
Pennsylvania state minimums for car insurance are 15k/30k for Bodily Injury , 5k for Property Damage and 5k for Medical Payment . All other coverage and limits are optional . However I highly recommend Uninsured -LRB- UM -RRB- and Underinsured Motorist -LRB- UIM -RRB- coverage . This protects You if the person who hits you does n't have insurance or enough insurance to cover Your damages . Go to : WEBSITELINK for more information and some free quotes !
In order to get a life insurance license in Pennsylvania you must complete any pre-licensing requirements and then take and pass the state insurance licensing exam . Once you have passed the exam the state will issue your resident producer 's license . You will also be subject to a background check before the state will issue your license .
It is 100 % Illeagel to drive an uninsured vehicle in the state of Pennsylvania . State minimums for car insurance are 15k/30k for Bodily Injury , 5k for Property Damage and 5k for Medical Payment . All other coverage and limits are optional . However I highly recommend Uninsured -LRB- UM -RRB- and Underinsured Motorist -LRB- UIM -RRB- coverage . This protects You if the person who hits you does n't have insurance or enough insurance to cover Your damages . Go to : WEBSITELINK for more information and some free quotes !
There are many cheap auto insurance companies throughout the US . -LRB- That is ... carriers that charge low rates -RRB- How cheap will your rate be ? It depends where you live and other underwriting factors that could impact the price . For example , while Progressive , Esurance , Geico and Erie may offer low rates in Ohio , in Pennsylvania or New Jersey , a completely different set of companies may be the best option . As experienced brokers , along with our top-rated websites , we search , find and compare the absolute lowest car insurance rates in all ares . That 's our job and a big reason why customers prefer to work with brokers .
There really is not a `` Number 1 '' health insurance company in the US . Although UnitedHealthcare , Aetna , Wellpoint and Cigna are among the largest companies , everyone 's opinion regarding who is the `` best '' insurer will vary . For example , in Pennsylvania , Independence Blue Cross and Highmark are very popular . In Ohio , Medical Mutual is quite popular . So naturally , where you live will greatly influence your opinion .
To get a life insurance license in Pennsylvania , you must pass a test after a course of study . There will be some fees to pay in order to get your license , as well . From then on you will need to take continuing education to renew it . If you are going to handle variable products , you must also get some securities licenses .
A better question is why would you not have life insurance ? It 's probably the single most important thing you can do for your loved ones . If you 're in the Pennsylvania , I 'd be happy to go over the importance of having it and if you 're not then please contact your local independent agent .
Hello - According to Homeinsurance.com , the average cost of homeowners in Pennsylvania is $ 727 . It is important to note however , that home owners insurance premiums are based off a number of factors which can be unique to each individual . The size of the home , year it was built , location , deductibles , amount of liability etc. all play a significant role in determining the rate you pay to protect your home . For a better rate that suits your needs contact me at www.PaInsuranceMadeEasy.com
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
Not all insurance companies offer online applications , but many of the top low cost life companies in Pennsylvania do allow for online applications . You can get quotes for dozens of companies in your state state by visiting WEBSITELINK Any of the quotes you see that say `` e-signautre '' allow you to submit your application online . If you need further assistance , one of the agents at the company will be happy to provide a consultation at no charge whatsoever .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Estate Include Life Insurance ?
Yes , your estate does include life insurance . While you are alive , it just includes the cash value available in your policy or policies . After death , the life insurance proceeds paid out to beneficiaries are included in the value of the estate . If a spouse is alive , there will not be any estate tax consequences . It is when the surviving spouse dies that the life insurance proceeds on that spouse can a taxable event -LRB- or if the first spouse to die left insurance money to the second to die , and those proceeds had not been spent or distributed when the second spouse died -RRB- .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
First of all , I need to stress that you should talk to an estate planning attorney about this topic . We life insurance guys know our way around the block here , but frankly , you should talk to an expert . Same as anything else where you need the best advice possible . Make sure it is an attorney who does specialize in estate planning . Real estate attorneys have their own area of expertise , as do commercial attorneys . Talk to somebody who knows the ins and outs of estate taxation . But , I can talk in generalities . If you own your life insurance , it would be included in your estate . If your spouse owns it , it would be included in his or her estate . Does any of this matter ? It does if you want to avoid or minimize estate taxation when your estate is settled . This means keeping both the state and federal tax people out of the picture to the greatest extent possible . How can you do this ? Well , since the ownership of assets is the key trigger in determining into whose estate money falls , then you can be creative with the ownership designation of your policy . It could be a trust . It could be another relative , such as an adult child . It could be your business . How do you make this decision ? This is where you talk with your estate planning legal expert and explore the ramifications of each choice . Taxation is not your only concern . There are issues related to control of assets as well . With the right guidance , you can put together a plan that gets the job done .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is alegal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trustsreceive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy.The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance is subject to estate tax when it brings the value of the estate -LRB- all assets , including the life insurance death benefit -RRB- over the exempted amount . Only the value of the estate that exceeds the exemption is subject to estate tax . The federal exemption for 2014 is $ 5,340,000 . However , some states collect state estate or inheritance tax with smaller exemptions . Life insurance proceeds are not included in the value of the estate when the life insurance policy is owned by a properly set up Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust . The ILIT must hold the trust at least three years before death of the insured .
In the simplest terms life insurance helps in estate planning because it creates a pool of money upon death . This money can be used for any purpose , but in most cases when estate planning is involved , it is used to pay estate taxes due . The main reason people do this is it allows other assets to remain untouched by the estate tax reach . Examples would be a business , investments , art work , real estate , etc. . that would n't have to be liquidated to pay estate taxes . So the easiest and simpliest way to look at life insurance in an estate plan is to pay off Uncle Sam so Uncle goes away . Nothing does it quicker or easier than life insurance . Estate Planning does n't have to be hard , people just make it that way .
Life insurance benefits are income tax free , but they can be included in the calculation of your taxable estate for estate tax purposes.The life insurance proceed amount is included in your gross estate if the proceeds are paid to the estate - this can happen if the named beneficiaries predecease the insured or if the estate is named the beneficiary directly . A life insurance trust can help keep the proceeds out of the calculation of the estate - the trust would become the owner and beneficiary of the policy and control how the monies are paid out .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A life insurance trust is a term often used to describe an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a form of trust drafted by an estate planning attorney in situations where it is intended that life insurance be held outside the client 's taxable estate . Such life insurance proceeds are usually planned to help pay estate taxes without having to sell existing estate assets . Otherwise , any life insurance owned by the client in their taxable estate would needlessly increase the value of the estate for estate tax purposes subjecting the estate to even higher estate taxes . With recent changes in estate tax exemptions , most individuals will not have to resort to ILIT in their estate plans unless their attorney suggests it for other non tax planning reasons .
Yes , your estate does include life insurance . While you are alive , it just includes the cash value available in your policy or policies . After death , the life insurance proceeds paid out to beneficiaries are included in the value of the estate . If a spouse is alive , there will not be any estate tax consequences . It is when the surviving spouse dies that the life insurance proceeds on that spouse can a taxable event -LRB- or if the first spouse to die left insurance money to the second to die , and those proceeds had not been spent or distributed when the second spouse died -RRB- .
First of all , you really need to talk to an estate planning attorney about this . We insurance guys know a lot about estate planning , but when there is a lot on the line , you need to consult with the expert . Plus , frankly , unless we have a special professional liability policy to cover this area , we dont have the insurance protection needed to cover our mistakes . One other point : make sure the attorney with whom you speak is a specialist in estate planning . Not real estate , not commercial law , not litigation . You want to get the best advice possible . Too much money is involved to speak with someone who only has a general knowledge of the field . Having said that , I can offer the following : If you designate yourself as the owner , could the benefit amount be included in your state ? Yes . If you designate the estate as the beneficiary , could the benefit amount be included in your estate ? Yes . If the beneficiary predeceases you , could the benefit amount end up in your estate ? Yes . Now : can you avoid these issues ? Yes . Could you use a trust as a tool for doing so ? Yes . Do you have a choice among different kinds of trusts ? Yes . Can you see why you need to talk to an expert on estate law to make a final decision here ? There are a number of routes to take . Whatever route you choose , you still need your broker to audit your policy on a regular basis . He or she needs to make sure it continues to meet your original expectations . If you do use a trust , a policy audit will definitely be beneficial to your trustee . That person could have legal liability if the insurance policy underperforms . A policy audit could head off trouble .
No , Life Insurance is not exempt from state or federal estate tax unless it is of an amount that is exempted by law . That amount varies by state for state estate taxes , and a few states do not have state estate tax -LRB- or inheritance tax -RRB- at all . The limit in 2013 for federal estate tax is $ 5,250,000 . If the estate is larger than that with life insurance proceeds included , federal estate tax will be owed on the amount that is not exempt . Life insurance that is properly set up in an irrevocable life insurance trust is not subject to estate tax .
When you are figuring the value of your estate , accountants do not usually include the death benefit of a life insurance policy in the value of the estate . They do include the cash value of any policies you own in the value of your estate . Upon death , life insurance proceeds are also included in the estate if you have incidences of ownership in the policy .
In short , when it 's part of the calculation of the estate . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property to a spouse without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , estate tax does apply to life insurance . In 2012 , if the size of your estate -LRB- with life insurance proceeds included -RRB- exceeds $ 5,250,000 , estate tax would have to be paid on the excess at a top rate of 35 % . Some people take care of estate taxes by buying a life insurance policy to pay them . Some use an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- to own and be beneficiary of the policy . There is so much expertise needed in transactions like this that we hire a professional who understands both life insurance and tax strategies for large cases . Make sure you get the best advice possible to help preserve your hard earned estate .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
Your life insurance is not included in your will . The monies are paid out as designated by the policy -LRB- the primary beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- are paid first - if the primary beneficiary predeceases the insured , the contingent beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- would be paid the proceeds -RRB- . If the monies are paid to the insured 's estate -LRB- the estate is the beneficiary to the policy or all named beneficiaries predeceased the insured -RRB- then the will would control how the monies are distributed because it controls who receives what from the estate . If the insured dies intestate -LRB- did not have a will -RRB- then the monies and the rest of the estate will go through the probate process . A life insurance trust can often be more useful for avariety of reasons including controlling exactly how you want the proceeds distributed and when they are distributed to the recipients , and estate tax purposes .
Financial Planning is a process that provides a client with impartial assistance in analyzing and organizing personal financial affairs in order to achieve financial and lifestyle goals in a tax effective manner . Estate Planning is Financial Planning starting with the end in mind . The principal objective of estate planning is to ensure that your property is managed most efficiently during your lifetime and that your wishes are carried out most effectively after you die . Life insurance can be used in numerous ways to help you achieve your estate planning objectives . In fact , there are too many to be completely covered here , so I will provide a few examples to give an overview . Life insurance can be used to create an estate -LRB- wealth -RRB- : - Cash at death to retire your debts - Leave your survivors with a home - An income for your family - An emergency fund - An education fund - and more Life insurance can be used to conserve an estate : - Cash at death to pay the tax and estate fees and avoid a bargain estate sale . An example would be that bills are due at death and your assets are in bricks and mortar . In order to generate cash , your heirs may have to sell at a loss to pay taxes and other bills . - Cash at death to provide for favourite charity . - Cash at death for estate equalization , you want to give a fixed asset to one heir and to be fair , provide cash to another . - Business life insurance to protect an important asset . There are a number of additional strategies available that use life insurance to conserve or increase the value of your estate and to provide you with living benefits as well . It all depends on your individual objectives . There is additional information on Estate Planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Do You Calculate Homeowners Insurance ?
Insurance companies use two types of calculation tools to first determine the cost to replace the home if there is a total loss . The replacement cost is one of the determining factors in rating a home . The next factors are the location of the home , information about the individuals purchasing the home and their prior homeowners insurance history . Then we discuss with the client the desired additional coverage 's and deductible options beyond the basic replacement cost to help determine what best fits the clients needs and to give peace of mind on this important asset .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
The best way to calculate how much homeowner 's insurance you need is to do an estimated replacement cost on your home . This takes about 5 minutes and it involves determining the square footage of your home along with many other calculations . A licensed broker can quickly calculate the needed information and provide a free quote for the entire policy package .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
Owning a home can be a big investment , in terms of money , time , and memories . You should make sure that you have enough homeowners insurance to protect that investment . I always tell my clients that homeowners insurance is n't meant to pay off your mortgage if something happens to it , it should be there to rebuild your dream if something happens . I use what is known as the Reconstruction Cost to calculate how much homeowners insurance you need . That coverage amount consists not only of how much it would cost to rebuild your home , but also includes some commonly overlooked things , like cost to demolish and remove debris , and possible changes in building codes and laws that could increase the cost to rebuild . Most of the other coverage , like other structures , personal property , and loss of use coverage are a percentage of the reconstruction cost .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
After January 1 , 2014 individual health and small group -LRB- 2 to 50 employees -RRB- healthinsurance is calculated on a community rated basis . Essentially a rate table is established for each insurance product with a corresponding rate amount for each year of age for a person enrolled . There is a rate for someone at age 25 , and slightly different rate for age 26 and so on for each year of age . For carriers applying the pure age rating approach it is a matter of telling an individual your rate at this age is `` X '' amount of dollars , for someone covering dependents it is a process of adding the rate for the subscriber , their spouse and/or dependent children -LRB- up to a maximum of 3 dependent children -RRB- for their various ages and that it the total rate for the individual plus dependents . Dependent children over age 21 are added to the cost as an adult . This is the individual insurance carriers and most small group carriers are now calculating their rates . As you might guess , for small businesses this can result in employees with the same level of enrollment coverage -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only -RRB- having different rates which is a headache from an accounting and employer contribution calculation perspective . Some small group carriers do the age calculation that I have described earlier , divide the total by the amount of enrollees in each coverage class -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Family -RRB- and come up with a composite rate that yields a uniform rate for each level of enrollment . How the insurance carrier has filed their products with your state insurance commission will determine which style of rates you see from different insurance carriers . However , the underlying rate methodology is the same .
A life insurance professional can provide a customized analysis using one of the conventional methods which center on a capital needs analysis . The calculations look at how much you need as a lump sum to create an income for your family . For a high level view , you can run some numbers yourself . There are a wide variety of online calculators available such as this one : WEBSITELINK Online calculators can help you visualize the need and better prepare you for a planning discussion with your agent who will help you ensure you have the right amount of life insurance .
There are many factors that go into the rating of your policy . One of those is the base rate your insurance company files with the state . Everything is calculated off the base rate and insurance companies usually adjust their rates at least once per year . There will be a rate effective date buried somewhere within your policy but you may not see it easily . They will adjust their rates based on their experience for the last year and they can go up or down depending on how the claims have been . You 'll also see the coverage A -LRB- dwelling -RRB- get adjusted every year . As construction costs change , so will the coverage on your home -LRB- just a hint , they usually do n't go down -RRB- . Then there are a few other factors that may affect your rates : insurance score , claims , changes in coverage or deductibles . They all go into the rating calculation . Do yourself a favor and read your renewal -LRB- you 'd be surprised how many people do n't -RRB- . You 'll be able to track what 's happening and look for anything that might not be right . If you have a question , talk to your agent . He/she should be happy to go through it with you .
There will be a range of answers in the calculation . Are you married ? Do you have kids ? Are they going to college ? Do you own a home ? Have a mortgage ? What is your income and prospective income over the next few years ? Does your spouse have a career of their own , making a good income ? How much do you participate in the family income ? The broadest answer is from 2 to 10 times your annual income . Use these factors to calculate the more precise amount . thank you . GARY LANE .
There are two popular and entirely different purposes to calculate present value of annuities . 1 -RRB- * Calculating retirement funding needs . Suppose you are planning to retire next month and want to purchase a fixed annuity with guaranteed interest rate of 3 % that will immediately start providing you with $ 25,000 of annual retirement income over the next 25 years . Being able to calculate present value of annuities helps you see the lump sum you will need to pay for your annuity -LRB- in this case , approx $ 435,330 -RRB- . 1 -RRB- * Calculating loan payments . Using the same example in reverse , let 's say you had a $ 435,330 mortgage at 3 % and you wanted to pay it off in 25 years . Purchasing an annuity for that amount would allow you to make payments of $ 25,000 per year for the next 25 years . * Both of these are overly simplistic examples . Talk to a licensed agent versed in annuities for specific annuity details .
Renters Insurance unlike Homeowners is not giving you coverage on the structure , rather the contents . Therefore , the amount of rooms does n't matter . Now if you are doing a calculation of personal property , it will most likely calculate a lower dollar amount than a two bedroom , because it is assumed there is stuff in each room .
Premiums increase is some policies and not in others , depending on the type of contract . One thing that does increase each year is the mortality cost -LRB- the chance of dying -RRB- . How the increasing mortality cost is dealt with has a large impact on the premium . For example with a 5 year renewable term plan you pay a level premium for 5 years and the excess over the yearly cost in invested to smooth out the premium . With a permanent level premium plan the insurance company actuaries do a calculation based on factors including morality cost , expense interest rate . They need an end so age 100 is often used . The calculation determines how much is needed to be pay on a level premium base . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The term ` Escrow ' has a double meaning . Escrow is utilized mainly in the Western States as the legal process of closing the purchase or refinancing transaction of real property ; Escrow Companies exist to facilitate the purchase , sale & refinancing of real property transactions . In States where Escrow Companies are not used , Mortgage and Title Companies utilize ` Closing Professionals ' to facilitate the same process . During the Escrow/Closing process , if a mortgage is involved , it is customary for the mortgage lender to require that all taxes are current and property insurance is paid in full for the first year . Escrow companies will be charged with the fiduciary responsibility to assure the mortgage company upon funding that both conditions have been met and proven . The term Escrow is also used synonymously with a Mortgage Impound Account which is simply a savings account setup for the purpose of saving funds in preparation of making payments to renew property insurance and property taxes ; a mortgage company or bank will simply calculate the necessary amount to be deposited into the Escrow/Impound account monthly in order for a shortage not to exist when future property tax and future property insurance invoices are presented . The monthly calculation usually involves the addition of the annual property tax and the annual property insurance , a 10 % safety buffer is added , then the total is divided by 12 . The account is an interest bearing account and an annual assessment summary is sent to the mortgage holder at the end of each year . There is usually no charge associated with having this account ; it is simply to facilitate payments without the burden of a large obligation at one time for the mortgage holder . It is important for homeowners to understand the escrow and/or impound process as there seems to be many misconceptions of how the process works . It is a very simple process but the most confusing to the ley person is the fact that he/she is actually depositing a monthly savings amount into an account which will pay future invoices presented . Property Taxes are generally invoiced twice a year and Homeowners Insurance is generally invoiced once a year ; money is saved on a monthly basis in order for the funds to be present when the invoices arrive . For a further and/or more detailed explanation , you may wish to contact your Real Estate , Mortgage and or Escrow/Closing Professional directly .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is Covered By Life Insurance ?
The insured and any persons listed as additional insured or riders are covered under a life insurance policy . Many people have life insurance policies including adults and children . The younger the person applying , the least expensive the rate will be . And of course , there are many types of policies that can be purchased .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Great question ! Typically a policy , whether it is a renters , health or life insurance policy will only cover the person or persons named on the policy . So if you put you and your spouse , you both are covered . If you name your family , then you all are covered . If it is just you , and you have a roommate who is not named , you are covered , they are most likely not . Check your policy and see who is listed , and who they will cover , or call your agent and have them tell you . Thanks for asking !
Who `` needs '' life insurance coverage ? Anyone who has someone who would be financially adversely affected by their demise . That would include anyone upon whom the burden of final expenses would fall . This would also include creditors who would bear the unpaid balances on loans . A person who wants to leave a donation or legacy to a person or organization , but whose estate would fall short of the amount desired to be passed on would also fall into the category of one who needs life insurance coverage .
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
Life insurance can be used for many purposes : business succession , estate planning , charitable giving , key person coverage , etc. . Because it has so many great features , life insurance works well for many financial endeavors . But those who really need life insurance are those who have people who need them , who they would leave behind . Unless they have been able to save up hundreds of thousands of dollars in a short period of time , most people with spouses and/or children need life insurance .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Because insurance primarily deals with `` pure risk '' , the chance of loss but not the chance for gain . The most effective way for a insurer toeffectivelymanage their own costs and to pay out on claims while still being profitable is through `` risk pooling '' which is the practice of grouping a large number ofhomogeneousand independent risks . By risk pooling those who subject the insurer to excessive claims should be off set by the policy holders who under use their policies . However the current market is notbalanced . . one of the goals of PPACA , therefore the majority of individuals who areseekinghealth coverage are the ones who are going to be mostlikelyto incur expensive claims . There are several other factors such as hospitals , when they extend charity care to poverty stricken individuals who need treatment they are forced to reconcile their budgets by charging more to the individuals who have the means to pay ... another area that PPACA aims to address .
Almost anyone can get life insurance . The only people who CAN NOT get life insurance are those who have serious health problems and who fall outside the age guidelines for guaranteed issue ; those who do not have any income at all -LRB- but even they may be able to get a policy with a cap on the face amount -RRB- ; and in the US , those who do not have citizenship , a green card , or work visa .
Critical Illness insurance is a specified disease based coverage meant to provide a tax free , lump sum face amount up diagnosis of a covered illness.There are several insurance carriers who offer this coverage and as you can imagine , each carrier covers different conditions . That said , there are a select few States where the Department of Insurance has not approved Critical Illness insurance for sale within that specific State . Anyway , of all the conditions covered ... the most important are Heart Attack , Cancer and Stroke . Not to downplay the seriousness of other diagnosed conditions but nearly 80 % of all claims that will get paid from these policies are due to those three conditions . Each carrier offers coverage for other conditions . Some carriers offer coverage for 21 different conditions , while other carriers may limit their coverage to 4 or 5 conditions . Please understand that when looking into Critical Illness coverage , the most important thing to look for is not just what conditions are covered but how they are covered . The benefit definitions are a major consideration and it is `` critical '' -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- to know the benefit definitions prior to purchase . There are carriers who provide a stroke benefit but will not pay a benefit unless the neurological deficit of the stroke persists for 30 days ... whereas there area few carriers who will pay a stroke benefit once the neurological deficit persists 96 hours . I hope this helped answer your question .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Homeowners insurance will cover the named insured and any family members who live in the house . It will also cover visitors belongings and any property you have stored in your house for another person . If a non-family member lives with you and is a permanent resident then you may want to include them as an additional insured on your policy . It will also cover anyone who is injured on your property and files a lawsuit on the liability prortion of your policy or a visitor who is injured and needs medical attention under the Medical pay portion of your policy .
That will depend upon how you are covered . If you are both covered as Employee Only at your respective employers then neither of you is covered as a dependent on the other 's health plan and you are covered subject to your plan 's benefits and your spouse is covered subject to their plan 's benefits . The same situation would apply if you were both covered under separate individual major medical plans . The issue of coordination of benefits only comes into the picture if one or both of you are covering each other as dependents on the two plans you are covered under . This is a relatively rate situation in 2014 though it was not that uncommon many years ago . If for some reason one or both spouses is covering the other as dependents then the coordination of benefits rules would apply . The spouse who is born earlier in the year will have the coverage that is deemed `` primary '' in this double coverage scenario and then the other spouse 's coverage would come in on a `` secondary '' basis and pay towards any amounts not covered by the primary plan . At most you would achieve 100 % coverage but in no case would the combined payout from both policies exceed the total claims amount .
Many people need life insurance . Studies show that many people know that they need life insurance . People who love someone else need life insurance to ease the pain of a premature death . People who owe money need life insurance to fulfill their obligations . People who are looking to the future need life insurance to protect their ability to obtain coverage . My favorite though , is wives need life insurance . They are so very important in a family and widowers have such a difficult time when they lose their wife .
You can have two or more life insurance policies , but if you apply for a second or third policy , the life insurance company does ask if you have existing insurance . Why do they do this ? Because they want to make sure that you are financially qualified for the total amount of coverage that you will own . This is to protect the insurance carrier from unscrupulous persons who would try to gain excessive profit off the death of another , and from terrorists or other criminals who would try to use life insurance for money laundering . For the average person who simply wants more than one policy in order to get sufficient life insurance , or who wants to diversify their coverage between different companies , applying for and owning multiple policies is fine .
Medicare Part B does not pay for routine eye exams -LRB- eye refractions -RRB- for the purpose of testing eyesight and prescribing eyeglasses . Medicare does pay for eye exams in some situations . 1 -RRB- An annual test for diabetic retinopathy is covered annually for all those who have diabetes . 2 -RRB- Glaucoma tests are covered once every 12 months for those who are at high risk for glaucoma . High risk patients include those who are diabetic , have a family history of glaucoma , are African-American and over age 50 , or are Hispanic and over age 65 . 3 -RRB- Some people with Age-Related Macular Degeneration are covered for various tests .
The specific auto insurance policy will have to be examined to determine who is an insured , who is covered , and who is excluded from coverage . Some states have endorsements which exclude specific drivers or persons . As insurance is regulated heavily on a state to state basis , including your state in your question should assist those of us who answer to give you more specific information . This is too ` general ' of a question to provide a simple answer .
People who buy critical illness insurance are those who have a genetic predisposition to certain illnesses based on family history , smokers -LRB- who have increased risk for getting some diseases -RRB- , those who have had loved ones with critical illnesses and have seen the impact firsthand , and those who do not have savings on hand to pay for the costs that come with this type of diagnosis -LRB- loss of work , travel , child care , bills -RRB- . All type of people buy critical illness insurance .
Who should own a life policy depends on facts and circumstances surrounding the purpose of the insurance . Often the owner is the insured and names a spouse the beneficiary . Life insurance purchasers are required to have an insurable interest in the life of the insured . Insurable interest generally must exist at policy inception . The underlying principle is that a purchaser must have a reasonable expectation of profit or benefit from the continued life of the insured . You have no limit on insuring your own life so you can name anyone as the beneficiary of your own policy . When you take out a policy on the life of another , there are limits on who can own the policy : 1 . Family members related by blood or marriage have an insurable interest in each other e.g. Parent/child and child by adoption , siblings , spouse , grandparents/grandchildren , and in some states , engaged couples . There is generally no insurable interest in nieces/nephews , cousins , aunts/uncles , other relative by marriage or stepparents/stepchildren . 2 . Creditors have insurable interest in a debtor to the extent of the debt . 3 . Business relationships which give rise to a financial dependency : an employee can insure an employer or vise versa . Partners can insured each other . Key employees can be insured by their employer . So , for example , two cousins who would otherwise not have an insurable interest , jointly own a business and therefore have an insurable interest in the other . The life insured always needs to consent with their signature and would need to consent by signature to the release and use of their medical information in the underwriting process for underwritten policies .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Ice Dam Damage Covered By Homeowners Insurance ?
It depends , which I know is an unsatisfactory answer . Assuming you have HO-3 Homeowners coverage there is protection against sudden rain/sleet/snow damage to your roof . In other words , if there is a sudden winter storm that persists for days on end , an ice dam builds up on your roof and causes damage there could be coverage . However , if you have an older roof and it has been through a few winter storms then the most likely answer you will get from an insurance company will be the damage was caused by normal wear and tear and the damage is not covered . So , depending upon the age of your roof , its pre-storm condition and the suddenness/severity of the storm you may or may not have coverage .
I am assuming by ice dams you mean the ice buildup around gutters . If that is the case the answer would be no . That becomes amaintenanceissue . Your homeowners policy will cover roofcollapsedue to weight of ice and snow but the ice dams around the gutters generally would not be covered .
There are circumstances where Homeowners Insurance may cover the damage caused by water leakage through a roof . It is best to check with your Insurance Professional , of course , about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If the roof is compromised or damaged by a covered peril , say a severe windstorm for example , then if rain water leaks in and damages the interior of your home , you will probably have coverage . Likewise , and as was the case again this past winter in CT , if you have interior water damage that is caused by `` Ice damming '' which is a sever build up of ice forming at the lower edge of your roof , that then forces melted water up under your roofing material , there will also be coverage . These are only two examples , so again talk to your Insurance Professional .
Water can be a major headache and also quite damaging to your property . In general , water damage that is weather related , oter than flood , is covered under a homeowners policy . Here in CT and throughout many northern states , we are unfortunately dealing with severe `` ice damming '' on residential and commercial property rooves . This causes water from melted ice to be forced up under roofing material which then can leak into the building . This causes some major damage to inside walls , flooring etc. . This type of loss is covered . Water that is suddenly dischargesd as a result of a burst pipe , for example is also usually covered . Talk to your insurance professional about your policy and ask about any specific coverage limitations .
It depends , which I know is an unsatisfactory answer . Assuming you have HO-3 Homeowners coverage there is protection against sudden rain/sleet/snow damage to your roof . In other words , if there is a sudden winter storm that persists for days on end , an ice dam builds up on your roof and causes damage there could be coverage . However , if you have an older roof and it has been through a few winter storms then the most likely answer you will get from an insurance company will be the damage was caused by normal wear and tear and the damage is not covered . So , depending upon the age of your roof , its pre-storm condition and the suddenness/severity of the storm you may or may not have coverage .
Perhaps yes , but it is important to talk to your insurance professional about your policy and the cause of the leak . If the damage is caused by a covered loss , then the claim will be settled but of course subject to your deductible . Here in CT this past winter we once again saw a number of claims lke this that were ice dam related .
Perhaps it will yes , but it is a good idea to talk with your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Generally speaking if you suffer water damage in your home as a result of a roof leak caused by wind driven rain or if a tree falls on it and breaks through during a storm , or due to winter ice damming to use three examples , then you would more than likely have coverage subject to your policy deductible .
It may . If you have maintained the property properly your homeowners policy will possibly cover the damage caused from ice damming less your policy deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A very simple way to picture how a Universal Life policy works is with a river with a dam on it . If the dam is open and water -LRB- your insurance premium -RRB- is flowing into the river , the river gets longer . I.e. . The years your Universal Life lasts get longer , maybe even the rest of your life . At the same time , there is very little water in the lake , or cash value in the policy . If the dam is closed , the lake gets higher , or the cash value in your policy grows . However , the river will dry up . If you want your Universal Life to build up cash value AND have longevity , you need to add more water -LRB- premium -RRB- to it . The beauty of a dam is that it can be adjusted to harness the power of water . The same is true of Universal Life insurance . It is very adjustable and can help accomplish your financial goals .
Most HO-3 homeowners insurance policies will cover the damage from ice damning . Insurance inspectors are very knowledgeable about this type of damage and can tell the difference between lack of maintenance or pre-existing conditions and damage caused by ice damning . Always read your policy and contact your insurance professional before making a claim . Hope this helps
If your residence is damaged because of the weight of accumulated ice , snow or sleet , you can expect payment under most homeowners policies . That does not hold true for a swimming pool , as that is an excluded peril . As a homeowner you should do all you can to stop accumulated ice from damaging your home .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
That is a great question ! If you are living in one of the Northern States where snowmobiles can see some use , it 's a good bet that you 'll be required to have some insurance coverage . There are a few really good reasons why it makes sense to get a policy . The first is that any damages or personal injuries that might occur on your property as a rule wo n't be covered by your homeowners policy . If something bad were to happen , you would be left unprotected for the liabilities of costs and damages . Your snowmobile -LRB- and trailer , if you have one -RRB- wo n't be covered under your auto policy either . So again , you would be liable for any damages if something bad were to happen . So what should you purchase ? I 'd strongly recommend the same kind of coverage that you 'd buy for your car - full coverage with comprehensive , collision , and liability . Here 's why - collision is obvious , if you run into something , or roll your sled , it will be covered by this part of the policy . The comprehensive portion covers the other stuff - hitting a deer , water damage busting thru ice , etc. . The liability part covers you for damage to riders , or property . You can add trailers to your policy coverage with some carriers , and that makes sense , as it 's cheap , and does n't get covered by most auto coverage . Sled policies are generally fairly inexpensive , and often can be discounted with multiple sleds , proof of training classes , and bundling with other policies . Most will not charge for non-use periods also . I 'd say it 's definitely something to have before you ever get on your sled , okay ? -LRB- I love this question , I 'm from up North originally myself , and do n't get to answer too many of these type questions here in Texas ! -RRB- Be safe , have fun , and thanks for asking !
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
A general rule of thumb is that Homeowners ' Insurance Policy is not a maintenance agreement . So if you are asking if you can have your insurance pay to replace your roof due to age or wear and tear , the answer is going to be no . However , talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Discuss the covered perils as they relate to damage that your roof may have sustained . For example , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow are all usually covered perils in a Homeowners policy . Therefore , if your roof was damaged as a result of these or any other perils named in your policy , then you will find that there is coverage . The settlement will , of course , be subject to your property deductible .
No , homeowners insurance does not cover maintenance . If you have a covered loss the replacement of any damaged electrical components would be included but it will not pay for general electrical work . Covered loss would be things like fire , lightening , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow . Check with your agent if you feel your loss may be covered .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
There are two points of view in fixed rate annuities . Under the low interest rate environment , the largest rate guaranteed for the shortest period and insurance company ratings be dammed . Or the ratings and balance sheet of the insurance company matters most and if that means a lesser interest rate , so be it . Most advisers are not locking fixed interest rates beyond five years .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can I Get Medicare If I Am Unemployed ?
Yes , you can get Medicare if you are unemployed , as long as you are age 65 or older and have paid in to Medicare long enough over the years to qualify for Medicare benefits -LRB- 40 quarters -RRB- . Medicare is based on turning age 65 , so even if you retire under age 65 , you must normally wait until you are age 65 to receive Medicare .
I have to be honest with you , I have been serving the insurance needs of the folks of Connecticut since 1985 , and I can not recall every seeing a situation where someone 's car insurance was higher due to their employment status . There are any number of factors that can effect the premium that we pay including driving record , type of vehicle , vehicle usage and where we may live , accident history and credit score to name a few . But I have not seen a situation where someone was paying more because they were unemployed or less because they were working . Frankly , I am not sure how an insurance company could justify that from their statistics .
There are two reasons why unemployed people may pay more for auto insurance : persistency , and claims . Issuing policies to new customers is costly . Agent commissions are heavily front loaded , and the company has to carry marketing and underwriting costs on new policies . Policies that stay on the books longer are more profitable than those that lapse shortly after being issued . People who are unemployed tend to have shorter persistency rates due to a lack of income . Many people become unemployed through no fault of their own , while others are chronically out of work for a reason . People with mental ilnesses and/or substance abuse problems often have a hard time staying employed . This population is also more likely to be involved in an auto accident . Sometimes those temporarily out of work get lumped into this category .
Temporary health insurance -LRB- also known as `` short-term '' coverage -RRB- is available from an experienced and reputable broker that represents all of the major carriers . For example , when I am discussing short-term plans with customers , often they only want benefits for a few months -LRB- possibly more -RRB- . In this situation , a short-term plan is ideal . Typically , most of the major companies offer this type of plan . Rates are VERY cheap and policies can be approved instantly or within 24 hours . Although pre-existing conditions are not covered , if you are unemployed , waiting for Medicare or other work insurance to begin , or a student that has just graduated , you may want to consider this form of coverage .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Yes , you can get a life insurance policy on your brother even if he is unemployed . The question will be who is the owner going to be ? You will have to explain if you are . If your just going to pay the premium , then there should be no real concerns . The amount of life insurance may come into question however . You should be able to get up to $ 250k with minimal issues . Over this you may have to provide an explanation since he is unemployed . Some companies will be more stricke than others so you may want to talk to your agent and see if they can look around for the best strategy moving forward .
Can you get life insurance if unemployed ? Yes , you can purchase life insurance while unemployed . Depending on the face amount requested however , you may have have to show the ability to pay for and the necessity for a higher level of coverage . The lower face amounts would not require as much review .
Great question ! All insurances work off of assumed risk . The higher the risk , the more expensive the rates . The insurance companies use a variety of statistical information to determine the levels of risk . They also make some assumptions that may or may not be true to you personally , but tend to hold true over the general population of the group . For example , the assumption is that if you smoke , your health risks are higher . The mortality statistics bear that out , as do statistics on cancer , and smoking related diseases . Therefore , life insurance rates are higher for smokers . The risk for someone unemployed is similarly higher than someone with employment . Someone who is unemployed will have a harder time making their premium payment , and the risk for the company to lose money is higher . They are going to try to minimize that risk by charging enough to quickly cover their costs . I hope that answers your question , if you would like to discuss it further , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
PPI covers repayment of loans such as car loans , mortgages , credit and store cards , and personal loans in the event that the borrower becomes unemployed or disabled . It does not pay life insurance premiums if unemployed or disabled . There is a disability rider that can be added onto a life insurance policy to pay the premium in the event of disability .
Your employment status is not a question on an application for homeowners insurance . The company will want to know your occupation but even unemployed is an acceptable occupation . Being unemployed may be a tragedy but it doesnt affect the insurability of the home .
Although unemployment does not technically offer health insurance , there may be other valid options , including : 1 . COBRA continuation of coverage , which the unemployed person recently had on the prior employer 's group plan . 2 . HIPAA portability coverage 3 . Medicaid for those with low income , for which the unemployed person may qualify 4 . A private insurance policy , known as an Individual / Family plan 5 . A private short-term policy to cover the gap between jobs , or the new-hire waiting period imposed by the new job . 6 . A conversion policy , in some circumstances 7 . Options in various states for high risk pools or guarantee-issued coverage . It is important for you to consult with an expert insurance agent/broker in your state , because acceptance of one of these options may disqualify you for another one . It is important to know your rights to coverage , the eligibility rules for that coverage , and the timeframes and deadlines that apply .
Under the Affordable Care Act , coverage is available to everyone through various programs including the Health Insurance Marketplace which is a great place to start if you are unemployed whereas coverage is not available to you from an employer . In addition , there are state programs that you may qualify for such as Medicaid . These programs are based on income eligibility , and you can see if you qualify and apply at your local Department of Health and Human Services office . If you are unemployed due to a disability , you may qualify for Medicare , regardless of age , through the Social Security Administration . However , their definition of `` disability '' is much stricter than many other programs . You can apply by phone or in person at any local Social Security Office or online at ssa.gov . Finally , many hospitals offer free or low cost health care based on income eligibility . They often follow a sliding-fee arrangement or offer free clinics for those in financial need . These clinics often provide care from volunteer doctors who are giving back to their community by offering care to those in need at no cost and are a great resource if you are in need of medical attention .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Unfortunately , you can not get Disability Insurance if you are unemployed . Disability Insurance uses the income you bring in from your job as the guideline as to how much Disability Insurance you can get . Without an income , there is no lost income to replace , and thus , the inability to get a DI policy .
If you are unemployed you should still be eligible for a small policy , and if you have many assets you could even get a large policy . A stay at home spouse can usually get up to the amount of coverage that his/her spouse has on them . Students who are graduating soon can often get coverage based on their anticipated income .
If you are a student or unemployed for other reasons , you can get a small amount of life insurance without a job . If you are a stay at home mom or dad , you can get the amount of life insurance that your spouse or partner has . Your assets do enter in to the amount of life insurance you qualify for , as well .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
You areprobably talking about the Childrens Health Insurance Program -LRB- CHIP -RRB- rather than Medicaid . These are two separate programs andthey operate under different rules and eligibility criteria.Eligibility rules will vary from state to state but they are based upon the parent 's income level . In most states a family of four can earn up to $ 47,700 annually and still qualify for this program . To get more detailed information you should call the CHIP hotline at 1-877-543-7669 and explain your specific situation to them to get a definitive answer for your state . Where your situation gets much more complex is in regards to Section 125 of the IRS regulations and whether your child would qualify for coverage under Title 19 of the Social Security Act or Title 21 -LRB- where CHIP come into the picture -RRB- . If your employer has a Section 125 plan in place and you are currently paying for your share of the health insurance on a pre-tax basis -LRB- the probability that this is the case is pretty high as most employers have adopted such plans -RRB- then you are probably locked into your current coverage until your group 's next open enrollment period . This is because becoming eligible for CHIP is not a `` qualifying event '' under the IRS guidelines that would allow you to drop your child from your group coverage during the group 's plan year . To be eligible for Medicaid under Title 19 there generally has to be a disability of some type involved or where one parent is absent , incapacitated or unemployed .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What To Do When Your Home Insurance Claim Is Denied ?
When and if your home insurance claim is denied , it is important to read the denial letter and associated explanation . Primarily , one should read the policy contract and truly understand the mechanics of the coverage and why the claim is not covered . The claims representative will be happy to help guide you through the policy and find the section -LRB- s -RRB- of the policy corresponding to the issue at hand . This is also an appropriate time to speak to a licensed representative with your insurance company and inquire as to whether there is an endorsement available to offer coverage for such a claim in the future . Licensed insurance representatives are generally not allowed to discuss an ongoing claim , this is the job of the licensed claims department . When speaking to a licensed representative of your insurance carrier , your questions must be based on coverage and not claims . Insurance agents are charged with the responsibility of explaining available coverage and endorsements ; they are not permitted to interpret coverage relevant to claims adjustment . For general advice or guidance , you may contact a licensed representative toll free at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 or contact your insurance carrier directly .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
Your auto insurance company can deny your claim , although most claims tend to be approved . For example , if you fraudulently filed a claim , or attempted to recover damages on a vehicle that you did not drive or own , surely , the claim would be denied . If you pet was attempting to drive your vehicle and hit a stop sign , then do n't expect a check from your insurer . When in doubt , an experienced broker can explain the entire claims process , how long it takes and what the likely outcome is going to be .
Usually , upon presentation of proof of death and a claim form , the claim is paid . However , a claim could be denied , depending on circumstances . In Canada , a claim within the first 2 years could be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . This essentially means you did not tell or disclose the truth on something that would have changed an underwriting decision . After 2 years you would have to have committed fraud which is much more difficult to prove . A life insurance contract should be approached as a contract of utmost good faith where all parties give full disclosure . In other words , be sure and tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Suicide within the first 2 years or last reinstatement would also cause a claim to be denied . If there was an accidental death rider , then that portion of the claim would not be paid unless the death is deemed accidental . . Laws are similar , but vary by jurisdiction . You should check the wording in your policy , your local insurance act and , if necessary , a lawyer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
In addition to the excellent explanations offered by the other agents on this page , life insurance claims are sometimes denied due to the nature of the policy . If you purchase a graded policy , it will pay a reduced benefit for death due to natural causes during the first 1-4 years . With that type of policy , death due to accident will usually pay 100 % from day one . Sometimes accidental death is actually caused by a health condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack while driving a car -RRB- . When the claim is denied , it can come as a surprise because survivors were not aware that the policy was a graded during the first two years , and/or that the root cause of death was determined to be natural vs accidental . The same is true for people who think they are buying life insurance , when they are actually buying accidental death insurance . You need to be very careful about what type of policy you are getting so that your claim is not denied simply because you purchased the wrong type of policy . A final , common reason for denial of claims is late premium payments . In our office , we spend a lot of time each week reminding people whose policies have entered the grace period , that they need to pay their premium or lose their coverage . But many agencies due not send reminders , and it is easy to lose track of addresses , phone numbers , and email address of clients because people change those frequently in today 's society . At the very least , keep your address up to date with the insurance company so that you will receive any late notices and keep your policy in force for the time of need .
You can , and it 's not uncommon at all . However , there are guidelines the insurance company will want you to follow . Many people have a primary home and a vacation or summer home . These can both be insured with homeowners policies , with one being designated as a seasonal home . The only real requirement is that the owner is the one occupying both homes , even if one is seasonal . Some people will try to do this for a home they rent out because it 's less expensive and the coverage is more broad . This is a big no-no . If there 's a claim and the insurance company realizes that the owner is not the one occupying the home , they will void the coverage and deny the claim . Rental homes require a different policy that takes into account the rental exposure . As long as you 're following the rules , you 'll be fine insuring two homes . Just be smart and do it the right way .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
Life insurance claims are usually not denied , especially if the policy has been in force for over 2 years . If a policy has not been inforce for two years , a claim may be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . Which means you did not disclose fully something that could have affected the underwriting of the policy . Not declaring you were a smoker for example . Or if death is by suicide the claim will be denied if within 2 years -LRB- In Canada -RRB- If the policy is over 2 years old the insurance company has to prove fraud which is difficult to prove . If the policy contains exclusion such as death while skydiving , no coverage for that event . If you have any further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
If an insured commits suicide within the first two years of coverage , the claim would be denied under virtually any company . Also , if someone commits a material fraud in their application and that is detected within the first two years , the policy would be cancelled with the money refunded . Otherwise there would be no valid ground for refusing a claim on life insurance . However , some lesser companies do all they can do to deny a claim or to delay payment . On the other hand , New York Life is a prompt payer on claims and is proud of that fact .
Assuming that all the cards are on the table and the agent really knows what they are doing , declines should not happen too often . But even in that case , here are some reasons people can be denied life insurance . 1 -RRB- Medical reasons that even they may not realize or think about when they talk to their agent . E.g. . The applicant takes two medications for depression , which is insurable . But when the underwriter looks at the medical records , they find that the patient has recently expressed suicidal thoughts to their psychiatrist , and the policy is denied . 2 -RRB- Insufficient medical information . E.g. . The underwriter wants to see the results of an MRI and no one can find it . 3 -RRB- Tobacco with a serious health condition that is impacted by smoking . E.g. Someone says they quit smoking when they had a heart attack a year ago , but then tobacco is found in lab results . 4 -RRB- Financial reasons . E.g. . The applicant is in the middle of bankruptcy proceedings , has a very poor credit rating , and owes back taxes . Rather than calling this a decline , it is often called a postponement . 5 -RRB- Wrong product . This is the most common reason for decline I hear about when people come to us after being declined elsewhere . They were just told to apply with a product that clearly does not work with their health and personal details . That is a completely avoidable reason for being denied . As you can see by the examples above , some people would be better off going with a No Exam policy to lessen their chances of being denied . Others are better off using medically underwritten coverage . Using an agency that specializes in taking cases declined by others can help you get an approval the first time .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Life insurance claims can be denied but it is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . If death was by suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy , the claim will be investigated . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in very limited circumstances of fraud .
When and if your home insurance claim is denied , it is important to read the denial letter and associated explanation . Primarily , one should read the policy contract and truly understand the mechanics of the coverage and why the claim is not covered . The claims representative will be happy to help guide you through the policy and find the section -LRB- s -RRB- of the policy corresponding to the issue at hand . This is also an appropriate time to speak to a licensed representative with your insurance company and inquire as to whether there is an endorsement available to offer coverage for such a claim in the future . Licensed insurance representatives are generally not allowed to discuss an ongoing claim , this is the job of the licensed claims department . When speaking to a licensed representative of your insurance carrier , your questions must be based on coverage and not claims . Insurance agents are charged with the responsibility of explaining available coverage and endorsements ; they are not permitted to interpret coverage relevant to claims adjustment . For general advice or guidance , you may contact a licensed representative toll free at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 or contact your insurance carrier directly .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Progressive Offer Life Insurance ?
Progressive is mainly known for car insurance . All or most car insurance companies WILL sell you life insurance but it 's not their main focus . And if you shop and compare it to companies that are mainly focused on life insurance , it is unlikely that you would decide to go with them or any other car insurance company for your life insurance . That would be like ordering a hamburger at Red Lobster . They could probably sell you one but it 's not really what they do .
Many property & casualty insurance companies will offer all lines of insurance as they want you to work through them even though they do not specifically offer life insurance as one of their products . Agreements are made with life agencies or companies to handle the life cases . One stop shopping as I sometimes refer to it . This keeps the company in front of you more often so when you have a need , you think of them .
Progressive is not licensed to sell life insurance . Progressive Casualty Insurance Company advertises life insurance that is carried through another online life insurance agency , but Progressive does not offer or underwrite those products or services , and is not responsible for the life insurance sold by that agency or the content on their website .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
In most states , Progressive Insurance offers Auto , Home Owners , Boat , RV and Umbrella policies . In California , my state , Progressive offers only Auto insurance . Progressive Auto Insurance tends to be very expensive in California . I 'm shocked at the amount of advertising dollars Progressive spends in the state when they do n't sell 4/5 products they advertise for .
It depends . Mild cases with little or no difficulty with activities of daily living are likely insurable . If in remission , the longer the remission the better the offer will be . Where the disease is either stable or progressing slowly , a rated offer can usually be obtained in moderate cases with some muscle weakness , difficulty walking , and moderate difficulty with activities of daily living . However it may not be possible to obtain an offer in later stages , with severe cases or where the disease is progressing rapidly . Offers from insurers may vary so consult with a life insurance professional who can shop the market for the best results .
Progressive Insurance company is a property and causality company and does not have a life insurance division . The independent agents that sell Progressive Insurance usually represent other life insurance companies and `` bundle '' life insurance with your auto insurance as an `` up sell '' or convenience to the client . Have your life insurance policy reviewed by an unbiased independent life insurance broker to be sure you have the right term life to accomplish your goals and not over paying . It is difficult for an agent to be an expert at every type of insurance sold .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Progressive car insurance rates vary , depending upon where you live , the type of car you driver , other drivers in the household , your MVR etc. . . Typically , Progressive 's rates are very competitive compared to other companies . In specific states , their prices will be much lower . An experienced broker can quote Progressive rates along with many other companies .
There are four basic types of multiple sclerosis -LRB- MS -RRB- : relapsing-remitting , primary-progressive , secondary-progressive , and progressive-relapsing . Obtaining coverage depends on your age of onset , the number of attacks , the latest attack , the treatment and medications youre on . Generally speaking , Standard issue for a nonsmoker is the best health classification is most mild cases of MS. Declination if you were just diagnosed within the last year .
Progressive Insurance Company is a company that has used `` advertsing '' very effectively to build their client base . They first offered just auto and then motorcycle and then homeowners and they just keep using that effective little lady with her funny little `` need that insurance ads '' and if yo call a Progressive Insurance agent in your neighborhoodsome good things may happen
Progressive insurance -LRB- based in Ohio -RRB- offers very competitive car insurance rates in most states that they are available . Renter 's insurance is not necessarily their specialty and therefore their prices may be higher than other available options . It 's also possible Progressive has handled more claims than expected , resulting in higher premiums .
Progressive does n't require a signed cancel request and you can access your policy right online and select cancel or call your agent . They are the Fastest when it comes to processing anything you should be able to immediately see the cancelation and if you have any refund . You also can call them direct at 1 800 progressive if you bought it online if you bought it from an agent you can call 1-800-876-5581 Bothe number should be able to assist you . They will tell you immediately if you have a refund coming or not .
Typically the battle for young drivers is done between Geico and Progressive . Due to the fact that a lot of their business is done directly through internet sales they are able to lower the premiums . However , I would recommend doing a little bit of research and checking out some regional carriers as well . Many carriers who only provide auto insurance in one to three states will offer competitive pricing in order to compete against the big national carriers . Either go online and look for insurance companies in your state or seek out a local independent agent -LRB- i.e. not a progressive , Allstate , State Farm agent -RRB- .
Progressive is not licensed to sell life insurance . Progressive Casualty Insurance Company advertises life insurance that is carried through another online life insurance agency , but Progressive does not offer or underwrite those products or services , and is not responsible for the life insurance sold by that agency or the content on their website .
Great Question . Progressive as a company in most states does not offer home insurance . Insted they have a contract with other companies that offer home insurance for there auto customers . I would look at other companies that can combine your home and auto with and get a good discount for that .
Progressive is Progressive Casualty Insurance Company . The company does not offer its own life insurance products . Rather it advertises that you can obtain life insurance quotes through another agency . Progressive is not responsible for the content of the website or products sold by that other online life insurance agency .
I believe there are many companies that underwrite for Progressive . Progressive lists the following companies at WEBSITELINK Homesite Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-960-8609 IDS Property Casualty Insurance Company Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-892-0824 Assurant Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-208-0978 All Risks , LTD Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 QBE Insurance Corporation Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 American Strategic Insurance Corp Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 Occidental Fire and Casualty Company of North Carolina Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 First American Property and Casualty Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Most insurers realize that a homeowners policy loss is very distressing . Many companies will start immediately providing a place to live under the policy provisions , and then as repair costs are determined , contracts let and progress is made , they provide progressive payments . In some cases the payments are limited to the actual cash value of the item damaged . If there is replacement cost coverage , the amount will be adjusted after the customer purchases the replacement item -LRB- s. -RRB- These are extremely complicated adjustments .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Mortgage Disability Insurance A Good Idea ?
If you have regular Disability Insurance , you will receive a monthly benefit in the event that you became disabled . This can be used to pay any bills you want it to pay , including , but not restricted to , your mortgage . So Mortgage Disability Insurance is not necessary if you have regular Disability Insurance . Whether it is a good idea depends on your situation .
Long Term Disability Insurance is a good idea if your income is needed to maintain a decent quality of life for yourself or your family . Everyone suffers when there is a disability , and even Disability Insurance does not replace 100 % of the income lost , so there is always going to be some hardship involved with becoming disabled . But if your being off work for more than a few months would cause your home mortgage to go unpaid , or cause your spouse to have to go back to work , or something else that would divert your family from some basic goals , then having Disability Insurance might be a good idea for you .
Anytime something major changes in your life it 's a good idea to evaluate the amount of insurance coverage you need . With a mortgage I would recommend a term policy that covers the length of your mortgage . If your mortgage is 20 years purchase a 20 year gauranteed level term , or for a 30 year mortgage purchase a 30 year term . This is the most economical way to protect you and your family if a tragedy occurs . If soemthing happens your spouse has the funds to pay off the mortgage . If not your cost remains level while the mortgage is in force and goes away when the mortgage is paid off . To save money you may want to ask your insurance agent about layering the term policies to cover your mortgage .
While a good idea , it is not required by law to purchase a life insurance policy in order to get a mortgage . I assume what you are referring to is Mortgage Protection Insurance -LRB- MPI -RRB- , which would pay your beneficiary so that they could pay off your mortgage in the event of your death . This is not to be confused with Private Mortgage Insurance -LRB- PMI -RRB- which is required to protect the lender in case of foreclosure , and is a legitimate requirement for borrowers who can not put down over 19 % on a home . The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau announced a crackdown this month -LRB- April , 2013 -RRB- on mortgage insurers who give kickbacks to mortgage lenders in return for business . So do n't let your lender make you purchase mortgage insurance from a certain company in order to get a mortgage . If you do wish to protect your mortgage in the case of your death , buying a simple level Term policy is often the most cost effective solution .
That is a great question ! If you increased your mortgage , and there is a chance of leaving that debt behind , then it might be a really good idea to add a policy or increase your coverage to hedge against that risk . Knowing that your new mortgage is probably putting a dent into your available funds , I 'd suggest that you look into a term life insurance policy in an amount that would cover the amount of the new mortgage cost . Term policies will be much cheaper than a whole life policy would be , and there is really no reason for the extra expense of the insurance once the mortgage is paid off . A term policy lasts for a specified period of time , and then ends , which makes it perfect for this kind of need . Look for a straight term , or decreasing term policy to cover the mortgage debt . I 'd advise you to find a good independent agent in your area , maybe your homeowners or auto insurance people are a good place to start , if it will earn you discounts on those policies also . Any reputable life insurance agent can hook you up also . If you have any questions on term policies , please feel free to contact me , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking !
If you have regular Disability Insurance , you will receive a monthly benefit in the event that you became disabled . This can be used to pay any bills you want it to pay , including , but not restricted to , your mortgage . So Mortgage Disability Insurance is not necessary if you have regular Disability Insurance . Whether it is a good idea depends on your situation .
Great question ! It is generally a good idea to protect your family from any large financial loss , and the covering of your mortgage is certainly one of those . Many lenders will require that you have it when you secure your mortgage loan , to protect themselves , and you in the event of an issue . It is a good idea always to protect your family . If you would like more detailed information , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
You do not need to have life insurance with a mortgage . If you borrow more than a certain amount , you will need to purchase PMI -LRB- private mortgage insurance -RRB- that will repay the lender what is owed them , if you pass away . Life insurance , on the other hand , will pay off your entire mortgage and leave the excess to your beneficiary to pay other bills . If your mortgage interest rate is so low that your beneficiary wants to keep paying the mortgage and invest the life insurance proceeds , they can so that , with regular life insurance . So , while life insurance is not required with a mortgage , it is an excellent idea .
You might need it if required , but its still a good idea to get it even if not required . When would you be required to get condo insurance ? Sometimes the condo association/HOA requires you to get it when buying the condo . If you had the condo for a while , you will find that you might be required to get it now that you are refinancing your loan through a mortgage company since mortgage guidelines have changed -LRB- which I see a lot -RRB- . Its still a good idea to get it because it provides coverage for your personal items and for the internal items of your property that you improve -LRB- known as betterments . -RRB- It basically fills in the holes and supplements the policy the condo association has on the entire building . Talk to your agent because there are a lot of important reasons to have condo insurance , such as for loss assessment -LRB- commonly found with condos and townhomes -RRB- , losses caused by a neighbor that does NOT have insurance , or losses happening because of your own doing . The insurance only costs $ 100 - $ 400 per year depending on what you need . Protect your investment and get the coverage , even if it isnt required .
There are two types of insurance that are often called Mortgage insurance . The first is required by the lender if the down payment for a home doesnt meet a certain threshold . This insurance protects the lender against default . This insurance is often required and included in the mortgage payment . The second is a life insurance policy that reflects the balance due on a mortgage . The idea behind this second form is for you to protect your family by making sure that they have a home , free and clear should you have a premature death . This insurance is obtained through an insurance agent and is handled outside of the mortgage .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
Mortgage Life to protect your love ones from the burden of a mortgage can be accomplished in a couple of ways . You can purchase a policy from your bank or mortgage company that will pay off your obligation to them in the event of your death . The amount of the policy will be paid to the bank and your family and loved ones will not have that mortgage as a burden . The other option is to purchase a Term Life Policy through an independent agent that compares the best companies for this type of protection . The main benefits of a Term Life Policy is that the death benefit will not decrease during the life or term of the policy . The other benefit is that the death benefit is paid to your beneficiary and they decide where the money is distributed . Your family and/or loved on can pay off the house and use additional funds for final expenses or other considerations . You should compare both options . The term life policy is more flexible but both should be considered . Mortgage disability insurance can be purchased as separate policy through your bank or some insurance companies . Disability income is paid at a maximum per month depending on your state . They will compare what you receive from other sources , such as your employer or personal policy , and determine the maximum amount of payment that your can receive . You can add disability income additions or riders to your term life policy for the amount of your monthly mortgage payment and get the convenience of one payment . The cost of these policies and riders are dependent on the amount of monthly payment needed , the length of time the payments continue , your occupation , and the amount of time between when the disability starts and when the payments start . Check with your agent to determine how the program works for you .
It 's a good idea for a wife to take out life insurance on her husband . Make sure you have an open conversation with your spouse and express your concern and come together on what you want the life insurance to do . Nothing can replace the loose of a spouse but having a game plan of how life insurance can easy the financial transition , maybe cover the mortgage payment , utilities , car payment or provide you a steady source of replacement income giving you time to grieving before you have to tackle the process of readjusting you life now that your spouse is gone . Know matter what your age is , it 's always a good idea to see if life insurance on a spouse fits your needs .
The Mortgage itself is a Loan Account setting up a method of repayment ; the repayment structure includes interest over the term of the loan . Monthly payments on a mortgage loan account are sometimes referred to as : P&I -LRB- Principal and Interest -RRB- . At the request of the customer and in some cases , as a requirement to the mortgage contract , an Impound Account -LRB- Escrow Account -RRB- will be initiated in order to accommodate the bi-annual payment of property taxes as well as an annual payment of home insurance . This account will pay a nominal interest rate credited to the account at the end of each year . If the customer has an Impound Account , the monthly mortgage payments will include a monthly savings amount which will be deposited directly into the impound -LRB- escrow -RRB- account in order to accumulate funds to pay future tax and insurance invoices . Regarding Homeowners Insurance , the policy must be purchased by the homeowner and the mortgage company must be listed as the Mortgage Loss Payee ; copies of all documents will be mailed to the mortgage company including invoices . If a homeowner does not purchase home insurance , the mortgage contract allows the mortgage company to place ` Forced Insurance ' on the property and charge the surcharged premium to the mortgage account ; this is not in the interest of the homeowner and should be avoided in the interest of premium amount and coverage afforded . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
First you have to understand what Term Life Insurance is . Term Life Insurance is Life Insurance covering you for a specific period of time . The common `` terms '' are 10-15-20-25-30 years . Term Insurance is also the least expensive of all Life Insurance , at least initially . Understanding this , people get Term Life Insurance for several reasons including ; mortgage coverage , other loans , family protection while the kids are home , providing replacement of income if death occurs during working years . The idea is providing protection for a period of time which will replace income or debt if death occurs prematurely . Example , for your mortgage , if you have a 30 year mortgage , with a 30 year term , death occurs before the mortgage is paid off , then the death benefit can be used to pay the outstanding balance . If kids are at home , growing up , you want to make sure they can have all the opportunities available to them even if the `` bread winner '' passes prematurely . All Life Insurance provides financial security when death occurs . If you have any other questions or need a quote , do not hesitate to contact me . Thank you .
A mortgage disability policy will make the mortgage payments in the event you are dsabled for a specified period of time . You can purchase this through your bank or some companies offer mortgage disability plans . If you have a mortgage take a look at picking up a mortgage dsability plan . Contact a local independent agent familiar with disability insurance .
This is a good question . Because you used the word `` more '' , I am guessing you already have life insurance . Take a look at your coverage to determine if it would be enough to pay off the debt . If it is not , then a term policy would be a great option . If this question came to mind because Mortgage Life Insurance was offered by the lender I would caution you to consider buying standard term life instead . Since mortgage life insurance is designated to pay off the loan it typically has a decreasing benefit that is in line with the pay off of the note . Another words your premiums stay the same but the pay out decreases as your debt decreases . The beneficiary is the mortgage company , so if the note is sold or you refinance you will have to rewrite the policy too . There are scenarios where mortgage life insurance is a good option . One that comes to mind is if someone has an underlying reason why they may be declined for life insurance . Mortgage life insurance can sometimes have less stringent medical screening . Life insurance should always be designed around all your financial needs . That is why it is best to work with a licensed agent who will take the time to understand your particular situation and advise you of your options . Good luck !
Generally Bank owned life insurance is designed to protect the bank if you take out a loan . I usually recommend buying your own policy . It gives your beneficiary more options . For example , mortgage insurance is usually offered by a bank . It can also be purchased on your own . Both would pay off the mortgage if you die . With the bank owned policy , that is the only choice . What if your spouse does n't want or need to pay off the mortgage however . This is not always the best option . If you own the policy , your wife or beneficiary may choose to invest the life insurance funds and use the interest to help make mortgage payments . Or the money would be more advantageous elsewhere . Mortgage life insurance with the bank is tied to that mortgage . What if you move ? Owning your own policy is portable , you can take it with you to your new home . I usually recommend level term to cover a mortgage . That way you have extra protection as your mortgage decreases because the death benefit will stay level . With a banks mortgage life insurance it just pays off the mortgage to the bank on that loan . Yes it works , but you are better off with your own policy .
Disability mortgage insurance is traditionally a payment provision to a mortgage loan that pays the monthly payment when due if the borrower who opts to have the coverage is sick or hurt and unable to work under the provisions of the coverage . Alternatively , some people can purchase specific products that cover mortgage payments , or at least make the amount of the mortgage payment available as a disability income benefit , if the insured become sick or hurt and is unable to hurt . This coverage is bought to ensure that mortgage payments are paid when the borrower can not work to earn money to pay the mortgage .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : Is having life insurance a good idea ? Well , just remember , do you have financial liabilities ? Do you have future obligations ? Do you have any intention for charitable gifting or any kind of inheritance that you want to leave your children or grandchildren ? If any of those questions are yes , then you need to look at life insurance . Now , it could be temporary life insurance , which is term life insurance , which is very , very inexpensive today . But if you have permanent obligations , permanent liabilities , or a charitable intent or a future inheritance where you want to bless your children and grandchildren , you 're going to need to look at permanent . Is it a good idea ? You want to indemnify both earners . Almost all marriages today , both mom and dad are working , so you want to make sure that you indemnify them both , because all their liabilities , whether it 's mortgage or long-term debt , those are all obligations that we carry together as working spouses . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medicare Crossover Insurance ?
Medicare crossover is not insurance . It is an electronic claim processing system used by Medicare providers to submit claims to Medicare . Once Medicare adjudicates the claim and approves it , the claim is sent to your Medigap carrier of record . This eliminates the need for your provider to file one claim with Medicare , another with your Medicare supplement provider .
Medicare crossover claims occur when you have original Medicare and a Medicare supplement , also known as Medigap . When you see a medical provider -LRB- doctor , lab , hospital , clinic , etc -RRB- and have original Medicare your provider files your claim with Medicare . Once Medicare completes the adjudication process and approves the claim they transmit it to your Medigapp carrier by way of crossover .
Diagnostic X-rays can be billed under Medicare Part A as part of your hospital stay , or under Medicare Part B as an outpatient procedure . Your medical provider will know how to code and bill the procedure to Medicare . If you have a Medicare supplement plan , Medicare will forward the adjudicated claim on to your Medigap carrier as part of crossover and your supplement plan will pay their portion .
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
If your doctor accepts assignment Medicare pays them directly once the claim is submitted , adjudicated and approved . Fees are based on ICD-9 -LRB- diagnosis -RRB- and CPT-4 -LRB- treatment -RRB- coding for services rendered . Once the claim is approved Medicare submits the claim via crossover to your Medicare supplement plan carrier that is on record .
Some Mayo Clinics will accept Medicare patients but only as a non-par provider . Mayo does not accept assignment . Mayo will file claims with Medicare on your behalf as required by law . Medicare will adjudicate the claim , and if approved , will send payment for their portion to you . Mayo does not participate in crossover .
Medicare crossover is not insurance . It is an electronic claim processing system used by Medicare providers to submit claims to Medicare . Once Medicare adjudicates the claim and approves it , the claim is sent to your Medigap carrier of record . This eliminates the need for your provider to file one claim with Medicare , another with your Medicare supplement provider .
Your doctor or other medical provider does NOT bill your Medicare supplement carrier . All claims are electronically filed directly with Medicare . Medicare reviews and adjudicates the claim , then passes on the claim to your Medicare supplement carrier that is on record . This is all part of the crossover process where the claim moves from Medicare to your supplement carrier . WEBSITELINK Your supplement carrier does not adjudicate claims and can not deny any claim approved by Medicare .
Medigap or medical Supplement insurance covers generally any expenses that your Medicare insurance coves . Some crossover plans under Medigap policy means that the company is setup with Medicare insurance , so no extra paper work is needed just hand the medical provider both the Medicare and Medigap card . Some Medigap policy will pay some amount of Medical expense outside of the United States as Medicare will not . Usually $ 50000 max
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Health Insurance Mandatory In Florida ?
Yes , health insurance is mandatory in the state of Florida or risk paying a fine . The affordable care act states that by January 1 , 2014 people are required to have health insurance or pay a fine . This rule is not just for Florida but for all states . An independent insurance agent should be able to show you plans from most of the major carriers and help you pick that plan that fits your needs . Several independent agencies -LRB- like ours -RRB- have a website that people can instantly compare health insurance plans online and then ask questions to experienced licensed agents over the phone .
Yes , health insurance is mandatory in the state of Florida or risk paying a fine . The affordable care act states that by January 1 , 2014 people are required to have health insurance or pay a fine . This rule is not just for Florida but for all states . An independent insurance agent should be able to show you plans from most of the major carriers and help you pick that plan that fits your needs . Several independent agencies -LRB- like ours -RRB- have a website that people can instantly compare health insurance plans online and then ask questions to experienced licensed agents over the phone .
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
When your employment ends , the employer will tell you when your coverage ends . That varies from employer to employer . Then , depending on your situation you will either move into a new employer 's plan of purchase a plan of your own . With the new legislation , Obamacare / Affordable Care Act which makes health insurance mandatory , you will need to make decisions pretty quickly . If you are moving immediately to another employer , you may obtain new coverage there , but if you are not moving directly into an employer sponsored plan you will buy an individual/family plan directly from an insurance carrier . My state , Florida , participates in Obamacare / Affordabe Care Act and your loss of coverage is a `` qualifying event '' for you to apply for an individual policy . You have a 60 day window to get coverage or there will be a tax penalty for you next year .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
I can address this question specifically for Florida . The Florida Department of Motor Vehicles requires that you register your car within 10 days . That 's pretty fast and a lot of people find becoming a Florida resident to be a bit stressful . It is important to know that in order to register your car you have to have Florida insurance . Handle the insurance first and take that proof of coverage with you to register . If your insurance carrier writes auto in Florida , changing the policy can be as easy as a cancel/re-write . If you 're changing carriers , be prepared to answer all the necessary questions for your household ... Driver 's License , Date of Birth , SSN and the vehicle information ... VIN number . Your use of vehicle is also important . Many new Floridians are new retirees as well . Be sure to have the policy rated correctly ... as a retired person vs someone who commutes to a job . Depending on the county in Florida , a visit in person with the agent may be necessary to verify no prior damage to the vehicle . Related to this is the need to change your Driver 's License . Depending on what state you are moving from some additional documentation to prove your identity may be required . Be sure to check this out before making the trip to the DMV .
Medicare Supplement Insurance in Florida is a fraction of the cost of what you would spend on medical bills over the course of your lifetime . Considering that Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs . You are on the hook for the other 20 % unless you have a Medicare Supplement . In Florida , the premiums can vary widely from North Florida to South Florida . An independent agent that specializes in Medicare Supplement Insurance will be able to show you everything that is available to you and help match the plan that fits your specific needs . Visit our website at SummitMedigap.com to compare Florida Medicare Supplement plans instantly online . We are also happy to help answer any questions you have at 1-888-407-8664 .
In Florida , the best Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- Plan will depend on your individual needs . Across the United States , Medigap Plans are standardized -LRB- plans have same benefits regardless of insurance carrier -RRB- . Not only can you use your plan benefits in Florida but anywhere in the U.S. as long as the provider accepts Medicare . Plan F is very popular because it covers all Medicare approved charges . But that does not mean it is the best plan for everyone . Plan F is the most expensive plan and Florida 's rates are among the highest in the country , and even though you can use your Medigap Plan outside of the state , you still have to buy the Plan in Florida if it 's where you reside . There are a couple other popular plans with lower premiums if you do n't mind small co-pays , co-insurance or meeting the Part B deductible . As a licensed independent agent in Florida , I can share with you the Plans that are available in your area . Since Medigap Plans are standardized , once you determine which Medicare Supplement insurance benefits you want then the next step is finding the premium that meets your budget . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
If you are looking for long-term care insurance in Florida , make sure you are dealing with an agent that has the proper certification . As Ms. Mace mentioned we have to be licensed to sell health insurance . In Florida , we also must take an additional class and pass the test to receive a certification to sell long-term care insurance . It is one of Florida 's ways of ensuring the customer is protected . I have my certification so if you are in North Florida please feel free to contact me : 3525145295 , cscottbannon@hotmail.com or PO Box 786 Keystone Heights FL 32656 . I would love to meet with you so we can individualize a plan of protection for you and your family . With much appreciation . To your prosperity .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
The cost of Home Insurance is based on the losses in your area . Extreme weather works in cycles , so a specific area will have several years of very severe storm losses , causing rates to go up . When that cycle ends the losses go down and so do the rates . Of course construction costs tend to trend up , as do the values of everything else , and insurance rates have to adjust to compensate , but without rate increases , insurance companies would not be able to afford to stay in business through the bad years . A great example of this is the state of Florida . After Hurricane Andrew , insurance companies were hit very hard . When they tried to raise rates the state passed legislation limiting rate increases . So , backed into a corner , many insurance companies went broke or pulled out of Florida . Consequently , the largest insurer in Florida is now the state of Florida -LRB- the taxpayers are on the hook for claims if another significant storm hits -RRB- . After several years of no severe storms , that trend is reversing with several insurance companies coming back into the state and the # of policies the state holds is decreasing .
Most states , and I believe Florida is included in this , require that you show proof of auto insurance issued in that state in order to register your car . So if you live elsewhere and are in Florida only part of the year , ask your Insurance Professional for a referral to a Florida agent if yours is not already licensed there .
There are several insurance companies in Florida that sell Medigap Plan F. Medigap Plan F , in Florida , will result in a pretty high premium compared to other states in the country . But if you do n't want to be bothered with co-insurance , co-payments or deductibles , then Plan F will meet your benefit needs . As a licensed independent agent in Florida , I can share with you the companies and Plan F rates that are available .
It really depends on the State you live in and the Company you are dealing with . In Florida , you can put your children , spouses and significant others on a Florida Blue plan . But ... if you go through the Government Subsidy , that 's a whole different story . Depending on the level of subsidy , the children may have to go on Florida Kid Care and significant others would have to go on a different policy .
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
The average cost of Medigap Insurance will depend on your age , what state you live in , your smoking status and which Medigap Insurance Plan you have . Medigap Plans can range between $ 75 per month to $ 500 per month depending on those factors . The average cost of Medigap Insurance will be different in different states . For example , Texas , South Carolina , North Carolina and Colorado are usually less expensive than South Florida . However , North Florida will generally be less expensive than South Florida . Work with an independent agent to shop the market for you and find you the best plan for the least amount of premium that matches your specific needs . For more information you can visit our website or give me a call . I would be happy to answer any questions for you .
Life insurance is not usually mandatory or by law such as car insurance and now health insurance . The exception would be if you were ordered by a judge in a court case such as a divorce or child custody case . The other situation causing life insurance would be a contractual agreement . Some examples of a contractual life insurance agreement would be a secured loan or a business partnership agreement known as `` buy sell life insurance '' . Other than these types of special arrangements life insurance is not considered mandatory , but if someone you care about depends on you for care or finances then out of responsibility you should carry life insurance . Remember life insurance is not for you , it is for them .
There really is no company with the cheapest long term care insurance in Florida because the rates for long term care insurance vary according to the health and age of the insured person . Long Term Care is rated for tobacco use , health conditions and other factors . Also , some companies will have cheaper rates for policies that cover couples , have a cost of living factor , etc. . To find your cheapest long term care insurance in Florida , contact an agency that offers an assortment of long term care companies .
Purchasing life insurance is not mandatory , unless it is stipulated in a contract you sign or a loan that you take out . Of course , the insurance company will also decide if you have an insurable interest , allowing you to purchase coverage . But in the vast majority of situations , buying life insurance is not mandatory .
end question
start question
annuities
Can Annuities Be Rolled Over To An IRA ?
Non-qualified annuities can not be `` rolled over '' into a qualified plans . Now that 's not to say that proceeds from a surrendered annuity ca n't be used as a contribution into your qualified plans , but taxation and penalties could present a negative economic result for using those funds for a qualified retirement plan . Check with your tax consultant first before moving forward with your annuity .
yes a variable annuity can be rolled over . Its no different than rolling over any other investment vehicle . You simple must make sure its it rolled over into a IRA or approved retirement instrument . The variable annuity is usually tied to a Mutual Fund . So timing is everything but not always logical to try roll over with the price share being its highest .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- rollover simply means that you are taking your funds in your current 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and moving them , rolling over , into an IRA , Individual Retirement Account . You can also transfer the your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to another 401 -LRB- k -RRB- as well if you are working for a new employer and they have a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- option . By rolling over your monies , you avoid any tax consequences as the money remains tax-deferred . There are several options for rolling these monies to an IRA . I usually recommend rolling them into an Annuity , a Fixed Indexed Annuity . The reason is to preserve the moneys you have worked so hard to get . You are guaranteed to never lose your initial balance and usually get market like gains . When you retire , if the account was set up correctly , you can get a lifetime income as well . If you are looking at options and would like more information , do not hesitate to contact your broker adviser . If you do not have one or would like a new perspective , contact me .
An IRA is a qualified retirement plan . It can be rolled over to another IRA or if you 're willing to pay the ordinary income tax in the year of transfer , a Roth IRA . Many plan participants roll over their company qualified plans into on IRA when they terminate their employment .
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is funded with before tax contributions . Income tax has not been paid on either the amount contributed to the plan , the employers contribution if any , or the gain the plan has realized . That income tax would need to be paid if the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- were rolled into a Roth IRA . The preferred method for any roll-over is a direct , trustee to trustee exchange . If you accept your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- in cash you must roll-over the amount quickly and carefully . See a licensed insurance agent to accomplish this roll-over .
How do you get your 401k after leaving your job ? Usually you would contact your HR department and see what steps they may require for processing your account . What is important to the situation is what is your plan for those 401k monies . Are you going to roll them over into your new employers plan ? Are you going to roll them over into an individual IRA ? Are you going to convert them to a Roth IRA ? or are you going to take the tax hit and cash your retirement out ?
Hi , that is a good question which many people get confused about . NO , you can not roll your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- directly to a Roth IRA . You first have to roll it into a traditional IRA . Then you may convert some or all of the balance into a Roth IRA . Remember you will have to pay taxes on the converted amount . There are strategies which can help pay for those taxes if you choose and if the strategy makes sense . Feel free to reach out to me if you have further questions . Merry Christmas . Matt
The company providing the Roth IRA should be able to support you fully in the process of rolling a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Make sure that you understand the tax implications . It is preferable to allow the company that is going to end up with the funds to initiate the roll-over . There are many problems if you start with your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan administrator as they are required to inform the IRS of any withdrawal from the plan . It is better if the proceeds pass from the current plan administrator to the company providing the Roth IRA
There is one circumstance that I am aware of that will allow you to roll a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- balance to a Roth IRA without the associated taxes and penalties . If your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan has a Roth option , which is becoming more common , then you can roll the Roth portion of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to a Roth IRA . I actually just did this for a client who had a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- balance that had two balances , one Roth and one traditional . We created two Rollover IRA accounts , one Roth and one traditional and completed the rollover .
From your question , I have to guess that you are no longer working for the company which has the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . If you get another job which has a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- option , you could transfer it although I do n't recommend this in most cases . From a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , you can roll it over into an IRA which can be anything from a mutual fund , stocks , annuities and other investments which IRA 's are allowed . In most cases , I usually recommend using an Fixed Indexed Annuity for a couple reasons . First , you can guarantee that you will never lose the money you have worked so hard to get . Fixed Indexed Annuities give you a downside guarantee along with an upside potential which will help you stay ahead of inflation . When it comes time to retire , you can use that annuity to create guaranteed lifetime income . You never will outlive your income . Please consult your adviser or connect with me if you have other questions .
A rollover IRA is an IRA that is funded from the proceeds of another qualified plan , most likely another IRA or a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The proceeds of these plans all have the same tax consequence so a rollover is simple . A Roth IRA has different tax rules . In order to roll an IRA or 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into a Roth IRA , the proceeds must be subject to income tax as ordinary income . This may be a very wise thing to do but should not be done without some competent counsel .
Assuming youre referring to 457 -LRB- b -RRB- retirement plans , 457 -LRB- b -RRB- deferred compensation plans that are available in government and non-government organizations under 501 -LRB- c -RRB- . Theres no 59 penalty as long as the plan participant is retiring or ending employment . Government 457 can be rolled personal over to IRAs . Nonprofit workers can only roll their 457 plans over to another 457 plan . 2013 contribution limits are $ 17,500 and an extra $ 5,500 if you are age 50 or older .
If you are no longer working , and officially retired , you will have to roll your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into an IRA . This IRA may be mutual funds , stocks , bonds , annuities , etc. . I like to recommend Annuities which provide an Income Rider that will give you guaranteed income for life . The other reason to move your monies into an Annuity -LRB- as an IRA -RRB- , is to guarantee you will not loose any of the money you worked hard to earn . When you are retired , loosing 10 % or more will affect your financial status , the monies you have available to retire with . Talk to your advisor or broker . Or you are welcome to reach out to me for more information . Thank you .
Yes , you can roll a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into a Variable Annuity as long as the Variable Annuity is a qualified account , an IRA . Be sure to look closely at Variable Annuities . I do n't usually recommend rolling a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into these as there is market risk meaning you can lose the money you have worked so hard for . Be sure you understand the pro 's and con 's in relation to what your goals are . Seek an adviser or contact me if you want to look at some recommendations based on what your future goals are .
The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is governed by a document drawn for the employer . Most plans offer a variety of distributions when you terminate , but they are not required to do so . Exercising these options can be quite important . Generally you would want to maintain the character of the funds . If they are tax deferred funds you would want them rolled into a standard IRA . If your income tax is going to be low you can consider rolling it into a Roth IRA and pay the tax for the withdrawal as though it were ordinary income , which is often an alternative .
That is a great question . Rolling over a traditional tax qualified 401K account to a Roth IRA would generate taxes and penalties so the benefit would certainly not be the tax savings , now would it ? A 401K converion transfer is called a Roth Conversion . There is a conversion option that might work and we call it a `` backdoor Roth IRA '' and it might provide some advantages but will require several steps and tax computations and may not be appropriate for you based on the information provided . Your best answer would be to consult with a local agency to learn more about how this conversion tactics might benefit you in a Roth IRA .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can be rolled into a very short list of retirement products . The funds must maintain the same tax characteristics . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- proceeds are often rolled into an IRA . Which specific IRA is beyond the scope of this answer . Most 401 -LRB- k -RRB- administrators require a formal request for the fund transfer . The actual transfer is best handled between the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- trustee and the trustee of the new plan that you have chosen .
In most cases yes . If the annuity is a qualified annuity then you must roll it into a qualified plan or risk being penalized . A non-qualified annuity can be rolled over into a different annuity if the new annuity is more suitable and contains greater advantages than the original annuity .
I am not a CPA . The character of the program hasnt changed . I am pretty sure that the money can be rolled into a Roth IRA without difficulty . You should understand that rollovers are coming under increasing scrutiny . Make sure that you fully understand the implications of the roll-over .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Why Do I Need Medicare Part C ?
You may not need Medicare Part C. Medicare Part C has evolved into what is now referred to as Medicare Advantage plans . With an Advantage plan you are in a privatized Medicare system run by insurance carriers . Most Advantage plans have networks with strict penalties if you use a non-par provider and considerably more out of pocket than with original Medicare and a supplement plan .
You do n't `` need '' Medicare Part C , but you may choose to have it as your Medicare coverage . Medicare Part C is really known as the Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO . Part C combines your Original Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- medical -RRB- , and usually Part D -LRB- drugs -RRB- . It 's important to note that if you have Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- , you do n't need a Medigap Policy and ca n't be sold one to help supplement your health care . You can only purchase a Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , if you are still on Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are a lot of moving parts to Medicare . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
Medigap and Medicare Part C are not the same . Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- policy is private health insurance established to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans with benefits designed to pay for Medicare approved charges not covered by Part A and Part B. Part C refers to a Medicare Advantage Plan . This type of Plan acts like an HMO or PPO . It combines your Medicare Part A and Part B , and usually Part D into one Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- .
Medigap and Part C are not the same . Medigap is supplemental coverage to your Original Medicare Part A and B . You do n't have to buy a Medigap Plan , it is optional . Many people , however , use the Medigap Policy to help cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs not covered by Part A and B. Medicare Supplement insurance is private insurance in which you pay a premium every month . You are allowed to visit any provider who accepts Medicare . Part C is called a Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO , so you are restricted to using network doctors . This type of Plan combines Part A , Part B , and usually Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- . It 's important to note , if you join a Medicare Advantage Plan , you do n't need and ca n't be sold a Medigap Policy . In other words , you ca n't buy a Medigap Policy to supplement your Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
This can be a bit confusing : when you use the word Part you are referring to Medicare . When you use the word Plan , you are referring to Medigap plans which are sometimes referred to as Medicare `` supplements . '' As indicated in an earlier post , Medicare Part C is Medicare Advantage . Medigap Plans are identified individually as plans A through G , and K through N There are Medigap Plans A , B , C , & D , which tends to confuse people because Medicare Has Parts A , B , C , & D. For more information on Medicare Parts A , B , C , & D , refer to page 15 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . For more information on all Medigap Plans , refer to page 101 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . You can download a copy of the Medicare and You 2016 handbook ; go to : WEBSITELINK
I presume you mean Medicare Part C. Medicare Part C was conceived in the 1990 's and offered participants an alternative to traditional Medicare . Most of the Part C plans were HMO 's and have very limited coverage area and limited provider networks . Most Part C plans are now available as Medicare Advantage plans , many of which also have limited geographic service areas , limited provider networks , and considerable out of pocket liability on a large claim .
Plan C in Medicare Supplemental policies is simply a plan that offers its own set of options , as do Med Supp Plans A to N. Part C in Medicare is also called Medicare Advantage . Part C is a combination of Medicare Part A , Part B , and usually , Part D .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
The passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 is when Medicare Part + Choice , or Medicare Part C , was created . At this time , the choice was given to purchase Medicare Part C -LRB- Advantage Plans -RRB- in addition to traditional Part A and B. Medicare Part C is offered and administered through private insurance companies and and regulated by Medicare .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part C , also called Medicare Advantage is a product that was developed originally back in the 90 's -LRB- called Medicare + Choice -RRB- to help cut costs for Medicare . It was overhauled in 2003 to the product that now exists . Medicare Advantage plans combine the benefits of Medicare Part A and Part B into a single program operated by a private insurance company . The funds for this program come from Part A and B premiums and often an additional premium from the patient . It is structured like most commercial plans with a copay or coinsurance for different types of visits , a maximum out of pocket expense , etc. . . Some plans do not have prescription benefits . These are called MA plans . Others , MAPD plans , have a prescription plan built in . Talk to a local insurance agent to find out if Medicare Part C is the best option for you .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Broken Car Window ?
An act of vandelism that occurs to a vehicle may be covered by the auto insurance policy that is held on the vehicle that was damaged if the policy includes comprehensive coverage less the deductible on the policy . Renters insurance is very much like homeowners insurance and will normally provide coverage for the insured personal property on the premise as its main function . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that it may contain .
Your homeowners insurance would cover a broken window if it was broken due to a covered loss . If the window was broken because you or the kids were playing baseball in the yard and someone knock the ball through the window that more than likely would n't be covered . Please read your policy completely to know what coverage is offered and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A broken window may be covered by a homeowners insurance policy depending on what broke the window . If an object flew through the window or a vandal broke the window this would be covered minus your deductible . Of course there are other perils that could be covered as well . Just keep in mind your deductible does apply and more often then not if the window is the only damage the window is probably less then your deductible .
Depends on the reason for the broken window.Typical renters policies will cover vandalism or a rock thrown from your lawnmower . If the broken window is on someone else `` s property then there maybe an issue with coverage . The situation becomes , how expensive is the window compared to your deductible ? The lowest deductibles are usually $ 250 - $ 500 and unless you broke a good size window , it will be cheaper to pay out of pocket .
A homeowners policy normally covers broken windows . This coverage is removed when a residence is vacant or abandoned . As long as the damage to the windows is one of the perils that the policy covers , a claim would be honored . The claim would be subject to the deductible which may reduce recovery on a broken window quite a bit .
It may , depending on the circumstances behind the broken window your renters insurance may pay for the broken window less your policy deductilble . Many policies include some coverage for broken windows . Please remember every policy is different . read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be .
The answer depends on what happened to the glass . Was it broken by wind/fire/hail ? If so , it would be covered under a standard HO policy assuming the home was occupied . If it was intentionally broken by the homeowner it would not be covered because insurance policies exclude intentional acts . Keep in mind that you would be subject to your policy deductible . It may not make sense to put a claim in for something small like a broken window or screen door because you could experience increased insurance costs for making a claim . I would speak with your independent insurance agent and discuss the best way to proceed given your situation . Typically , I like to reserve using your home insurance for a catastrophic event like a hurricane , major fire or damaging storm . Hope this answer helps .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about the particular terms and conditions of your policy . If you have suffered such a loss , I am very sorry that you have to go through this . Try to complete an inventory of the items that have been stolen and be sure to also try to photograph any damage that may have resulted from the break in - broken windows , forced windows or doors or the like . CALL THE POLICE and report the incident . I am assuming that you came in after the fact , but if you ever find yourself in a situation where it looks as if the burglary might still be happening , DO NOT go in . Report your loss to your Insurance Professional and they will open your loss report with your company . A claim representative will contact you and ask for your inventory and police report . Theft is normally a covered peril in a renters policy so the claim once investigated would be settled based upon the items lost and or damaged and the amount of your policy deductible .
Homeowners Insurance will cover window replacement for broken windows caused by a covered loss ; depreciation and the policy deductible will be a key factor regarding the payout of the loss ; you must review your policy contract for more specific terms and conditions . To review , policy forms , you may review the following link where the Insurance Services Office Form Homeowners 3 -LRB- HO3 -RRB- is published : WEBSITELINK
That is a great question ! Your homeowners policy will cover all kinds of things , like fire , someone getting hurt on your property , or a broken window . The coverage is broken down to two types : property , and liability . The property coverage protects against those actual physical damages that may occur . The liability side protects against damages that may be brought against you for things that happen upon your property . I hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! One of the best things about life insurance is that once the policy has been approved and issued , the only way that the contract can be broken is if you had misrepresented the facts about your health , decide to stop paying , or to cancel it . If there is reason for the insurer to believe that you had prior knowledge of your cancer when you applied for it , and said nothing about it , they can drop you . There is a two year window at the beginning of the policy that allows them that right . After that two year window , you are covered regardless of what turns your health may take . I pray that your cancer is easily beaten , and that you live a long and rewarding life . Thank you for asking !
Homeowners Insurance does cover your homes windows if they are broken due to vandalism , wind , hail or another peril that is covered on your policy . It is important to remember that the claim will most likely be subject to a deductible so when trying to decide whether or not to file a claim make sure to take your deductible into account .
If your window is damaged or broken and it is caused by a covered peril in your policy , then yes , you will have coverage , of course subject to your deductible . Keep in mind that you need to be residing in your home at the time that the damage occurred . If your home is vacant , there would be no such coverage .
That can really vary depending on the severity and type of loss . If for example , a rock or a baseball has broken a window , that can be handled pretty quickly . If on the other hand the house has suffered severe damage as a result of a storm or a fire for example , that could take a bit longer .
Renters Insurance would take effect in the event of a loss to your personal property as well as peronal liability . If someone broke into your home your renters insurance would cover the stolen items , if the building were to burn down renters insurance would cover your personal property , also if you were to have your car broken into and items stolen those items would be covered under your renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is designed to reimburse you the current value or replacement value of items which are damaged due to an unforeseen event such as fire , water damage , etc. . If your electronics just stop working , is broken , it probably will not be covered . If it was broken by a stranger , I would look at your policy to see if that would be covered . As always , reach out to your agent or get a consultation with a reputable agency who can design the best possible coverage . You may have to look at a different type of insurance for `` broken '' items versus damaged from an event .
Home insurance does not cover a broken TV , a broken radio or any broken appliance . Wear and tear and product defect are simply not perils that insurers pay for for home policies . Fire , theft , vandalism and many other items would be covered . An experienced broker can review the best prices in your area so you pay less and cover more .
Great question ! The damage should be covered , but if it costs less to fix it than your deductible is , you may be better off not filing a claim . For example , let 's say the damage to repair your window is $ 200 . Your deductible is $ 500 . Your insurance is only going to pay anything over the $ 500 mark , so you will end up paying for the window regardless . It may not make sense to file a claim , pay for the window yourself , and then watch your rate go up . If you have renters insurance , and the car was in your apartment parking lot , there may be coverage there , depending upon the terms of your renters insurance . If you did not file a police report , I 'd recommend that you do , it will help you if you ever need documentation of damage and help collect on your claim . If you need help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Renters Insurance does cover broken items as a result of a covered loss ; perils may be fire , theft , vandalism etc. ... It is important to review your current policy and assess what perils the policy covers against . If an item is covered and claimable under your renters insurance , it would be preferable to have a replacement cost policy thus providing the replacement value of the item rather than the depreciated value ; also , the applicable deductible will be deducted from the claim payout . For those seeking #rentersinsurance , there is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Your renters coverage will cover your possessions if the water damage is from a covered peril such as a broken pipe , but will not cover you from damage due to a flood from rising waters . In order to be covered for damage from a flood , you will need to purchase a renters flood policy .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Where Can I Find Cheap Car Insurance For An 18 Year Old ?
There 's no doubt about it . Car insurance for teenage drivers is expensive ! New drivers are 5 times more likely to have an accident . The good news is there are ways to lower your cost without sacrificing coverage . The biggest mistake I see parents make is reducing coverage when they add their son or daughter . If your child has an accident the parents will be sued , not the child . If you are going buy a car for your child buy an older vehicle and stay away from sport cars . A Mustang GT is not a good option for lowering your cost . If you are not going to buy a vehicle and have more drivers than cars , then you can list your child as an `` occasional driver '' . Most companies also offer Good Student Discounts and a discount for completing driver 's education so make sure you inquire about both of these for additional savings .
Cheap car insurance rates for an 18 year-old are sometimes possible . As an experienced broker with 33 years of experience , our job is to find the lowest rates offered by the most reputable carriers . But the coverage you have on the vehicle is critical . While low liability limits and high deductibles may result in affordable prices , it is important to understand what the `` sweet spot '' is when picking the right policy .
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
Cheap car insurance for 18 year-olds may be available through selected carriers . Finding the lowest rate is best accomplished when you work with an experienced broker . There is no cost or obligation , and the potential savings can be substantial . Although the least expensive rate is not always the best option , the combination of low rates and great coverage is what brokers -LRB- experienced ones -RRB- find the best . If your policy will be taken out by an adult , they should be consulted . As you get older , your cost will reduce , and save you quite a bit of money . But most importantly , having the most appropriate deductibles and liability limits may save you much more ! LIVE answer provided by Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience and owner of several nationally top-rated websites that offer consumers the lowest available rates .
Full coverage auto insurance for an 18 year-old can vary , depending on many factors . For example , the type of vehicle , and driving record of the teenager will greatly influence the rate . If the car is financed , the type of coverage will be different which will impact the cost . Finding the lowest rare is critical so you do n't overpay . As an experienced broker -LRB- with 33 years of experience -RRB- , we manage a top-rated website -LRB- see profile -RRB- that offers free online quotes . In moments , consumers can view the cheapest car insurance rates for an 18-year old . Another important factor is that often , when you turn 19 , insurers will discount the rate , especially if you have three years of driving experience . The price reduction could be substantial , A good-student discount -LRB- if you are in school -RRB- , will also reduce premiums , often by hundreds of dollars .
Cheap car insurance rates for an 18-year old -LRB- and other teenagers -RRB- can only be found by shopping the right way . There are dozens of carrier that offer coverage , and for a young driver , prices could vary by as much as 80 % . An experienced -LRB- preferably 20 years in the business -RRB- broker -LRB- and our websites -RRB- guide you through the shopping process by helping select the companies with the best offers . And yes , if your grades are good , you 'll save money !
Auto insurance for an 18-year old can be fairly affordable or quite expensive . The rate depends on the type of vehicle that is being insured , the driving record of the person applying for coverage and where they live . And yes , males are more expensive to drive , which I always found to be quite ironic considering my sisters were the persons in an accident , not me ! Of course , that was 40 years ago . Re the rates of the 18-year old , perhaps as low as $ 50 per month or much much higher . Shopping the top-rated companies will help and that 's what experienced brokers like us will do .
At what age can you get life insurance ? Usually `` you '' can purchase life insurance from the age of 18 on . Life insurance is considered a contract and in order to have a binding contract both parties must be of legal age . An insurance company can not contract with a 10 year old or a 15 year old legally . So how did my kids get life insurance before age ten ? Because I `` own '' the policies as their parent . I had an insurable interest to insure my kids and I went into a contract with an insurance carrier . My kids are simply the insured and because at the time of purchase they were not of age to be party to a legal contract , they can only be the insured until 18 and I could sign over ownership at that point in time .
Cheap car insurance rates for an 18 year-old are sometimes possible . As an experienced broker with 33 years of experience , our job is to find the lowest rates offered by the most reputable carriers . But the coverage you have on the vehicle is critical . While low liability limits and high deductibles may result in affordable prices , it is important to understand what the `` sweet spot '' is when picking the right policy .
There are many carriers out there all can be quite `` Cheap '' But be careful when shopping for rates cheap does n't always mean you have the proper coverage . Also depends on what type of coverage you are looking for . When shopping online there are times that the rate is fantastic then you find out that they are not even allowed to sell insurance in your state . you also have to think about in the event of a claim can they be reached and you talk to someone local ? Buyer beware make you are covered properly like the old saying goes if it is to good to be true then most likely that is the case . However I do have some carries that I have a client in that has full coverage on a car and only $ 143 for 6 months of coverage with low deductible now that is cheap but her coverage is not . So the key is making sure you know what you are purchasing before you put the money out . A Local agent or the States insurance commissioners office can assist you in finding what you are looking for
How much does life insurance cost for a 24 year old ? Well with all types of insurance , provided you are a healthy individual , the price is pretty low . While Term is cheap at this age , so is permanent coverage and a young person should consider the real advantage of locking in their coverage while it is low cost and has the most time to work in their favor . I am so glad as a 53 year old who at 24 was a very atheletic , fit individual who contracted diabetes at 40 and had a bout with A FIB -LRB- heart problem -RRB- at 53 that I locked up my life insurance in my 20 's , when my good health allowed me to purchase it for cheap money . My rates are locked in , I own the policy , they ca n't take it away , they ca n't make me requalify , the policy does n't `` end '' before I do . This is n't even taking intoaccount all the other benefits a permanent policy provides , but the factit 's `` mine '' I `` own '' it , I do n't rent it .
The way to get cheap auto insurance at age 18 might vary by your state . In California it would help if you were a part of a household with other drivers who have a good driving record . It will help a great deal if you are at least a B student , carrying a full load . It would help if your driving record was spotless . It would help if your household had other lines of insurance with the same carrier , there might be several multi-line discounts available . Different insurers might offer additional discounts . Finally , it might help if you were assigned to an older car and accepted only PL/PD coverage on that vehicle .
Car insurance rates on an 18-year old female will be lower than rates on a male ! And perhaps by quite a bit . But your exact premium depends on many factors including your age , where you live , your driving record and perhaps other variables . If the car is titled to a parent -LRB- highlyrecommended -RRB- , you 'll probably pay less than having to insure the vehicle on a separate policy . You 'll also retain many discounts that your parents currently receive .
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
Well sometimes there can be certain people that will need a term policy because of where they have focused their budget in the past , over all it does n't fit every persons goals but will be cheaper . I will use my story to answer the question when I purchased my policy I realized that it would take some focus on my part even working with a very knowledgeable agent I already knew just like most families we wait until about 45 -55 years of age to purchase what we should have purchased in our 20 's in the first place and then we start shopping to find out wow this is not cheap but it is now or never . So $ 300 a month was not cheap for me but I knew it 's now or never so I made a commitment to my family it 's now I want leave them with this burden it 's just a decision just like the one that caused you to make the decision to wait . now where did that come from procrastination and that can be inherited by your children so I would say change your focus change your life .
You should purchase life insurance when you feel it is appropriate . I purchased my first whole life policy when I was 18 years old . I wanted to pay for my final expenses , establish my insurability and I looked to the policy to help me save money in a disciplined manner . When I married , I increased my policy to provide for my brides needs should I die prematurely . I still buy life insurance and am contemplating an additional purchase .
Cheap car insurance can be as little as $ 20 or $ 30 per month , depending on where you live , the type of car you drive , your age , and of course , the liability limits you have . Some carriers offer discounts that can total as much as 50 % . It is , however , important to understand that state minimum liability limits may leave you underinsured . Although low liability limits result in very cheap pricing , it 's important that we , as experienced unbiased brokers , advise you which coverages may be the most appropriate . To find the lowest rates , always utilize an experienced broker . Not only do we offer unbiased advice and top-notch websites , but you can also save time and money by quickly finding the best prices . The quoting process typically takes only a few minutes and you 'll be able to view the best options in your area .
I agree with Bob and Larry above and to add a little more detail about the age range : A parent can take out a life insurance policy for a child 's benefit , usually when the child is 2 weeks old . The parent does this to provide guaranteed insurability for the child and/or to provide a vehicle to accumulate money for the child . When the child is 18 or older , the parent can change ownership to the child . The maximum age that I have seen to take out a policy is 90 years old .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Do You Verify Health Insurance ?
Health insurance can only be verified by contacting a policy holders insurance company to confirm a policy remains active . The simple fact of someone carrying an insurance card can not be taken as verification they are covered , let alone how their benefits may work , or what portion of a bill the patient should be responsible for paying .
You will need to contact your insurance company and confirm the policy is in force -LRB- active -RRB- . There should be a customer service number on your insurance card that you can call to verify the policy is active and you are covered . They 'll likely ask you for your name and other identifying information -LRB- e.g. policy number , social security number , date of birth , etc. -RRB- - they can only release the information to the policyowner -LRB- in health insurance this is generally also the insured - if not the insured , it 's the spouse or another family member - seen more commonly in group plans -RRB- . Your agent can also verify this information for you as well .
If your health insurance policy is not a grandfathered plan put in place before the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- provisions went into effect and certainly if you have enrolled in a major medical policy after January 1 , 2014 then the answer is `` Yes '' . Under the ACA law health insurance plans must treat mental health and substance abuse problems as any other illness . In addition , there are now provisions for preventive care services in relation to some mental illnesses , depression screening and behavioral assessments for example , that must be covered at no cost to the member . A policy holder should carefully examine the provisions of their own policy or call their insurance carrier 's member services department to verify what services are covered , where they are covered and what coverage provisions of your contract your needed services are subject to . For example , if you are an individual who enrolled in a Bronze level plan and youneed mental health services that are not preventive in nature but are for actual treatment then it is a virtual certainty that these services will be subject to your plan 's deductible and/or co-insurance provisions before you begin to see the insurance carrier paying for these services . In many cases this could be an amount in excess of $ 6000 before you would cease paying out-of-pocket for any services . Also , verify which mental health/behavioral health providers and facilities are in-network with your provider and determine if you have to be pre-certified to see any of these providers before you seek care in a non-emergency situation .
PPO is not a type of health insurance . It is an abbreviation for Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- which describes the network provider contracting approach associated with whatever health insurance plan you are purchasing . PPO network based health insurance products have dominated the marketplace for many years so it is not unusual for the consumer to blend the two . After January 1 , 2014 you will want to have your health insurance agent check for you , or if you are a `` do it yourselfer `` do someresearching online to determine the type of provider network associated with health plans you may be interested in . The traditional features of PPO plan designs have been to have office visit & prescription copayments , lower deductibles , higher co-insurance levels and lower out-of-pocket financial exposure for using in-network PPO providers while still having coverage for voluntary usage of non-network providers at reduced benefit levels . PPO plans are the dominant network arrangement in the current health insurance marketplace . However , changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , are causing insurance carriers to re-design their products and this does extend to the design of their provider networks . This is especially true of the health insurance products sold in the government health insurance marketplaces where the consumer may encounter multiple network or sub-network type provider arrangements in this environment . For instance , here in Tennessee , the BC/BS plan offers essentially the same insurance products with pricing based on your choice of 3 different PPO networks at 3 different price points . The larger the PPO provider network you choose the higher the insurance premium associated with the product . In fact , the smallest of the 3 BC/BS network options is offered only in the government marketplace . So , these are words of caution , there are degrees of difference even within what are technically PPO based products these days . Do n't just assume that a provider is going to be in-network with an insurance carrier based upon your past experience . Verify with both the insurance carrier and the doctor 's office that they are a participating provider . Also , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace starting in 2014 , you will want to be aware of the growing move back to Point-of-Service -LRB- POS -RRB- , Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- and Accountable Care Organization -LRB- ACO -RRB- based provider delivery systems associated with a growing number of health insurance products . These other variations on the theme apply more stringent guidelines to provider access in a variety of ways -LRB- reduced network sizes , gate keeper referral arrangements , sharply reduced or no out-of-network coverage -RRB- and introduce entirely new considerations for the consumer .
In Florida , you should be able to add a car to your policy over the telephone . If you are purchasing a vehicle you must have insurance on that vehicle before you can drive it . Therefore , most dealerships will request that you call your insurance agent to add the newly purchased vehicle to your policy . That way , your insurance agent can verify the fact that you are purchasing the vehicle and verify the condition , make , model , year , VIN and purchase price . If they do not let you add a vehicle over the telephone , you may want to look at a different company .
PPO stands for Preferred Provider Organization and is today the most common provider network arrangement associated with most health insurance plans and is the least restrictive on the actions of its subscribers/members . In simplest terms the health insurance carrier negotiates a payment contract with a medical system that makes it 's affiliated physicians , facilities and other providers the `` in-network '' providers where people who enroll in that insurance company 's products will receive the highest level of benefits/coverage . Generally PPO 's allow their members to directly access the health care system at any level and as long as you are using a provider who is in the PPO network the member receives the higher in-network level of benefits . This means that there is little or no gatekeeper mechanism in place that requires the member to receive a referral from their primary care physician in order to see a specialist or obtain other more complex medical services . For the consumer to effectively use PPO health insurance they should learn how to determine whothe in-network providers are for their health plan -LRB- most easily done by going online to the insurance company 's web site -RRB- and to use those providers for their health care needs . A word of caution , this is a time of rapid change and , in many cases , consolidation of physician 's practices in the world of health care . As such , physicians and other health care service providers are shifting around at an unprecedented level . So , just because you remember Doctor X as being in a certain provider network from 2 or 3 years ago is no guarantee that they are in the same relationship today . It is up to the consumer in the PPO environment to make sure they are using an in-network provider and they should verify this before receiving services from a health care provider .
If you are paying the premiums for your health insurance with after tax dollars it is likely that you may deduct at least a portion of your premiums from your income tax , because health care expenses are tax deductible and health insurance is a health care expense . If you use a tax preparer or CPA consult with them . If you use a computer program to prepare your tax returns it should verify the deduction and how much .
Based on my education and experience in the industry up to this point -LRB- at least in Wisconsin -RRB- ; the police do not have any way currently to verify if you have insurance or not except for asking for your POI when you are pulled over . I have heard that other states require a licensed driver to show proof of insurance before renewing their license or registering a vehicle which may allow the police in those states to verify the presence of insurance coverage .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
You will need to contact your insurance company and confirm the policy is in force -LRB- active -RRB- . There should be a customer service number on your insurance card that you can call to verify the policy is active and you are covered . They 'll likely ask you for your name and other identifying information -LRB- e.g. policy number , social security number , date of birth , etc. -RRB- - they can only release the information to the policyowner -LRB- in health insurance this is generally also the insured - if not the insured , it 's the spouse or another family member - seen more commonly in group plans -RRB- . Your agent can also verify this information for you as well .
To verify your enrollment and the Plan -LRB- s -RRB- you have with Medicare , you can visit www.Medicare.gov . The secure website will allow you to access to your enrollment information . On the Medicare.gov homepage , click the button that says SIGN UP / CHANGE PLANS and then select Check Your Enrollment from the menu . Have your Medicare card available and enter the following information into the data fields . Zip Code Medicare Number Last Name Effective Date for Part A Date of Birth After entering your information , press Continue . Medicare.gov will provide you with the Plan -LRB- s -RRB- you are currently enrolled in . If you need additional information not provided by the website , you can always call 1-800-MEDICARE to verify your coverage .
It is possible to get an auto insurance quote over the phone , but to secure coverage the carrier will more than likely require you to meet with an agent to sign the application and verify that all of the information on the poliy is correct . A will typically not want to cover a vehicle for damage if no one from the company has seen thevehicle to verify its condition .
The first place that you can check is Policy Locator Service through the Medical Information Bureau . MIB Group , Inc is a cooperative data exchange formed by the North American life insurance industry in 1909 . There is a cost associated with the search but it will return results via mail with a list of queries by insurance companies for underwriting on the search subject , from whenever they were `` shopped '' for insurance . Keep in mind , that this is not 100 % inclusive for all insurers . The search form is located here WEBSITELINK Secondly , through some sleuthing using either the above list or my following list of suggestions , you should contact the insurers on your target list , in order to verify the active policies . Where to search : - Credit card and bank statements : Go back through the insured 's financial records and look for periodic payments to insurers , whether it be on a monthly , quarterly , semi-annual or annual basis . This should indicate who the insurer is/was based upon where the money is paid to . - Banks , Credit Unions , Credit card companies : Often times , many banks , lenders and credit companies offer group policies for their account holders for as little as $ 1,000.00 of coverage and higher amounts based upon certain requirements . Check with these groups to see if they had offered any of these products at any point in time . - Pay stubs/Employers and Benefits companies : Many employers offer a basic life or AD&D policy to full time employees for free as well as inexpensive group policies . Deductions for the premium payments on the group policies may be found on the insured 's pay stub . However , many times , this coverage is only active when the insured is employed . - Split Dollar/Executive Compensation plans : Some employers taking advantage of tax regulations , used life insurance to pay benefits to key employees which may have also been part of Supplemental Exec Retirement Plans -LRB- SERP -RRB- . Verify with the insured 's former employers if any plan existed . - Unions , Pensions and Fraternal organizations : Many Unions and Pension funds may have a small paid-up policy on the insured as part of their benefits package . The same goes for Fraternal organizations including Knights of Columbus , Elks , Masons , etc. . Many times the search is no easy task however , after a bit of detective work and dedication , you may uncover a handful of forgotten or unknown small policies , where the cumulative benefit adds up and more than justifies the search !
Most agents are not going to outright lie about anything material to a policy . They can be sued if they lie . Some do not tell you everything . If they show you an illustration , are there missing pages ? Do they tell you the good and the bad about what they are showing you . Is the information they are giving you verifiable ? Are they local ? A local agent who has been in the community for years is less likely to be deceptive , his reputation is at stake . How long has the agent been in business ? Again , reputation means a lot , but do n't get me wrong , new agents are honest too . It is just one factor to look at . When you receive your policy go over it with the agent and make sure the things he told you are in the policy and question anything that looks different . If you still do n't have a good feeling then either turn the policy in , most have a free look provision , or get a second opinion from someone you trust .
Health insurance can only be verified by contacting a policy holders insurance company to confirm a policy remains active . The simple fact of someone carrying an insurance card can not be taken as verification they are covered , let alone how their benefits may work , or what portion of a bill the patient should be responsible for paying .
You can usually add your spouse or children to your health insurance . If you also are the legal guardian or a particular person you more than likely would be able to add this as well to your health insurance however it would more likely depends on the state you are applying for health insurance with you might need to check with your independent state to verify who you can add as well .
Most health insurance policies will cover nutrition counseling through a dietician though under what circumstances can vary significantly from one insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . Remember , many larger employers are self-insured which gives them much greater say in what is covered under their plans than groups using fully insured health insurance plans . The bottom line is that you need to look at your policy 's summary of benefits and possibly contact your insurance carrier to verify what your coverage would be , for what conditions would it apply , and for how many visits or for what length of time . Generally a medical diagnosis for a condition such as diabetes , high cholesterol and/or high blood pressure or anemia -LRB- among others -RRB- would be situations where the services of a dietician could be viewed as medically necessary . Getting sports dietary nutrition counseling so you can become a marathon runner for example would not meet that criteria and is highly unlikely to be covered under your health insurance .
If you are covered by a `` group plan '' then you will have some coverage . How much-call the company and ask . If you have an individual policy the coverage is going to be even more limited and you need to call the company or give your information to the insurance clerk at the doctors office and have them verify coverage . The amount of coverage available for mental health is within the bounds of the `` 90 days lifetime maximum coverage as in Medicare .
Life insurance premiums can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including age , sex , health , and residence . Prices , and underwriting practices , also vary dramatically by company . The best way to find `` cheap '' coverage is to speak to an agent that represents many different carriers , giving the agent the ability to shop your case to find you the absolute lowest rates possible . Unlike health insurance , life premiums can vary , often by 400 % or more , based on your health . You normally take a paramed exam to verify your health status , so be advised that the rate you are originally quoted may increase after the exam .
If you have an existing auto insurance policy then you should be able to drive the new vehicle of the lot . You want to verify with your insurance provider your coverage 's . If you do not have any insurance in place do not drive the car anywhere until you have secured an insurance policy . Besides the fact you are required to have insurance to operate any motor-vehicle it would sure be a bummer to wreck your new car and have no coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Progressive Insurance Have Life Insurance ?
Progressive Insurance company is a property and causality company and does not have a life insurance division . The independent agents that sell Progressive Insurance usually represent other life insurance companies and `` bundle '' life insurance with your auto insurance as an `` up sell '' or convenience to the client . Have your life insurance policy reviewed by an unbiased independent life insurance broker to be sure you have the right term life to accomplish your goals and not over paying . It is difficult for an agent to be an expert at every type of insurance sold .
Progressive is Progressive Casualty Insurance Company . The company does not offer its own life insurance products . Rather it advertises that you can obtain life insurance quotes through another agency . Progressive is not responsible for the content of the website or products sold by that other online life insurance agency .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
Progressive Insurance company is a property and causality company and does not have a life insurance division . The independent agents that sell Progressive Insurance usually represent other life insurance companies and `` bundle '' life insurance with your auto insurance as an `` up sell '' or convenience to the client . Have your life insurance policy reviewed by an unbiased independent life insurance broker to be sure you have the right term life to accomplish your goals and not over paying . It is difficult for an agent to be an expert at every type of insurance sold .
In most states , Progressive Insurance offers Auto , Home Owners , Boat , RV and Umbrella policies . In California , my state , Progressive offers only Auto insurance . Progressive Auto Insurance tends to be very expensive in California . I 'm shocked at the amount of advertising dollars Progressive spends in the state when they do n't sell 4/5 products they advertise for .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Progressive car insurance rates vary , depending upon where you live , the type of car you driver , other drivers in the household , your MVR etc. . . Typically , Progressive 's rates are very competitive compared to other companies . In specific states , their prices will be much lower . An experienced broker can quote Progressive rates along with many other companies .
There are four basic types of multiple sclerosis -LRB- MS -RRB- : relapsing-remitting , primary-progressive , secondary-progressive , and progressive-relapsing . Obtaining coverage depends on your age of onset , the number of attacks , the latest attack , the treatment and medications youre on . Generally speaking , Standard issue for a nonsmoker is the best health classification is most mild cases of MS. Declination if you were just diagnosed within the last year .
Progressive does n't require a signed cancel request and you can access your policy right online and select cancel or call your agent . They are the Fastest when it comes to processing anything you should be able to immediately see the cancelation and if you have any refund . You also can call them direct at 1 800 progressive if you bought it online if you bought it from an agent you can call 1-800-876-5581 Bothe number should be able to assist you . They will tell you immediately if you have a refund coming or not .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
I believe there are many companies that underwrite for Progressive . Progressive lists the following companies at WEBSITELINK Homesite Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-960-8609 IDS Property Casualty Insurance Company Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-892-0824 Assurant Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-208-0978 All Risks , LTD Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 QBE Insurance Corporation Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 American Strategic Insurance Corp Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 Occidental Fire and Casualty Company of North Carolina Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 First American Property and Casualty Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176
Progressive Insurance Company is a company that has used `` advertsing '' very effectively to build their client base . They first offered just auto and then motorcycle and then homeowners and they just keep using that effective little lady with her funny little `` need that insurance ads '' and if yo call a Progressive Insurance agent in your neighborhoodsome good things may happen
Progressive insurance -LRB- based in Ohio -RRB- offers very competitive car insurance rates in most states that they are available . Renter 's insurance is not necessarily their specialty and therefore their prices may be higher than other available options . It 's also possible Progressive has handled more claims than expected , resulting in higher premiums .
It depends . Mild cases with little or no difficulty with activities of daily living are likely insurable . If in remission , the longer the remission the better the offer will be . Where the disease is either stable or progressing slowly , a rated offer can usually be obtained in moderate cases with some muscle weakness , difficulty walking , and moderate difficulty with activities of daily living . However it may not be possible to obtain an offer in later stages , with severe cases or where the disease is progressing rapidly . Offers from insurers may vary so consult with a life insurance professional who can shop the market for the best results .
Progressive is not licensed to sell life insurance . Progressive Casualty Insurance Company advertises life insurance that is carried through another online life insurance agency , but Progressive does not offer or underwrite those products or services , and is not responsible for the life insurance sold by that agency or the content on their website .
Most insurers realize that a homeowners policy loss is very distressing . Many companies will start immediately providing a place to live under the policy provisions , and then as repair costs are determined , contracts let and progress is made , they provide progressive payments . In some cases the payments are limited to the actual cash value of the item damaged . If there is replacement cost coverage , the amount will be adjusted after the customer purchases the replacement item -LRB- s. -RRB- These are extremely complicated adjustments .
Typically the battle for young drivers is done between Geico and Progressive . Due to the fact that a lot of their business is done directly through internet sales they are able to lower the premiums . However , I would recommend doing a little bit of research and checking out some regional carriers as well . Many carriers who only provide auto insurance in one to three states will offer competitive pricing in order to compete against the big national carriers . Either go online and look for insurance companies in your state or seek out a local independent agent -LRB- i.e. not a progressive , Allstate , State Farm agent -RRB- .
A diagnosis of Dementia should be covered as an illness under a short or long term disability plan if it was in force prior to dianosis . The elimination period would not begin until the dementia was deemed by a physician to be to the point that your normal duties of your job could no longer be performed . Typically dementia progresses slowly in younger adults still working . Most disability policies end around age 65 or 67 years old when this disease is more likely to progress .
Our agency specializes in life insurance for people with Multiple Sclerosis , and we find that they are often very discouraged by their experiences in trying to find get insurance . They say it is a breath of fresh air to talk to agents who understand their disease and know what options are available for each type of MS. So my number one answer to this question is yes , just make sure you go to someone who specializes in MS life insurance . Whether your MS is relapsing remitting or one of the progressive types will be the first indicator of whether you can get a medically underwritten policy . If progressive , there are a number of No Exam policies available . If in a wheelchair or needing help with ADL 's , guaranteed issue is the only choice . Relapsing remitting MS with minimal to moderate symptoms , stable and effective treatment , able to work -LRB- although being on DI will not matter in some cases -RRB- , and no large effect on memory will result in a policy rated Standard to table 4 with the carriers we find best for multiple sclerosis life insurance .
No , according to their website , Progressive is not licensed to sell life insurance . They sell auto insurance , home insurance , motorcycle insurance , boat insurance , RV insurance , commercial auto insurance , snowmobile insurance , Segway insurance , a personal umbrella policy , and business insurance -LRB- worker 's compensation insurance , general liability insurance , business owners insurance , and commercial vehicle insurance -RRB- .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Leak In Roof ?
It may . It will primarily depend onwhether the leak was the result of a covered loss or not . Under normal circumstances and the leak not caused by a covered event ; the leak would more than likely not be covered . Please remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and learn of any exclusions contained within or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Homeowners Insurance policies generally do cover ceiling leaks ; however , one must be cautious on this topic . Primarily , we must discover the cause of loss and make sure that the cause of loss is one of the covered perils on the policy . We must be certain that there were no exclusions on the policy -LRB- i.e. Roof Leaking Exclusion -RRB- . In few situations , a carrier may be willing to insure a home knowing that the roof is not in good condition , it has been known for few carriers to accept a roof exclusion and in this case , the policy would not cover leaks as a result of the known and exluded condition . If the loss is covered , items that will affect the payout of the claim would be Depreciation -LRB- if the policy is not a replacement cost policy -RRB- and the selected Deductible which will be deducted from the final payout ! For information on a homeowners policy , please review the following : WEBSITELINK
There are two parts to this question . Your homeowners policy will cover damage caused by a roof leak if it is the result of a named peril . You should read your policy or consult with your agent to determine if there is coverage . Frequently there is . The second part is the roof itself . If the roof leaked as a result of a named peril it could be a valid claim , however , many insurance companies do not replace a roof , rather they pay the actual cash value of the roof . That is the depreciated value of the roof .
If the leak in your roof was caused by a sudden event such as a storm then the damage would be covered . If the roof leak is just simply due to wear of the roof and is on going then this is a maintenance issue and insurance polices are not maintenance policy . Therefore the leak would not be covered .
The correct answer here is `` it depends '' . Normally any water that enters from the outside will not trigger coverage . If the roof just plain leaked , then the building owner is responsible for any losses that happen . They have a duty to maintain their property . Their failure to maintain their property makes them responsible for any damage caused by the leaky roof . If , however , the roof leaked as a direct result of damage from a storm , it may be covered . The key words here are `` sudden and accidental '' . A leaky roof certainly is n't sudden , it 's a maintenance issue . My advice would be to contact the building owner and tell them what was damaged . I do n't know how your lease is written , but they are responsible for upkeep of the building . Therefore they should be responsible for any damage to your stuff if it was damaged because of the roof . They may not agree easily .
Homeowners insurance will cover water damage from a roof leak if the roof sustained damage from a recent storm and the damage to the roof resulted in damage inside the home . If the roof has issues that have gone unrepaired , water damage in this circumstance would not be covered . The roof damage and the water damage must have occured at the same time . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
Yes . Generally homeowners insurance will cover the water damage from a leaky roof . If your carpet or personal property is damaged it should be covered under your policy as long as the roof leak came about unexpectedly . However , homeowners insurance will not cover the cost to repair the roof .
The damage caused as the result of a leaky roof is probably covered . The damage to the roof would be covered if caused by a named peril . If the roof leak is covered it will be covered as a depreciated item by most insurance companies , rather than replacement . It is important to stop the leak as quickly as possible regardless of whether there is coverage or not . The damage to a house by water can be quite severe .
The damage caused by a leaking roof will probably be covered by your homeowners policy . The repair to the roof itself would be covered if it was the result of one of the covered perils listed in your policy . If the loss comes from normal wear and tear the policy will not cover the roof repair . The roof is a critical component of a home and the owner should exercise care to maintain it in good condition . Failure to do that could result in cancellation .
The resultant damage from your leak will likely be covered if it is caused by something other than wear & tear . Wear & tear is excluded under most homeowners insurance policies . If lightning strikes the roof and you have an Ho-3 insurance policy , it will cover the damage to the roof and the leak damage . Always check with your independent insurance agent for specific coverage options that your policy has .
Your homeowners policy may cover a roof leak up to the policy limits less your policy deductible if the cause of the roof leak is due to a covered incident . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Not sure what type of leak you are referring to , but in regards to things like roof leaks and pipe leaks generally speaking a home insurance policy could pay to fix the damage the leak causes but most wo n't pay to fix the actual leak itself . BE AWARE that this pertains to new or recent leaks . Many carriers have put language in their policy contracts over the last couple of years excluding coverage for for prolonged leaks . Some carriers have even set a time frame as short as 14 days for this exclusion . Every carrier is different and those carriers are even different from state to state . This is something you definitely need to run past your local independent agent . Do n't discuss this in general terms , but ask for the specific language in your actual policy .
There are circumstances where Homeowners Insurance may cover the damage caused by water leakage through a roof . It is best to check with your Insurance Professional , of course , about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If the roof is compromised or damaged by a covered peril , say a severe windstorm for example , then if rain water leaks in and damages the interior of your home , you will probably have coverage . Likewise , and as was the case again this past winter in CT , if you have interior water damage that is caused by `` Ice damming '' which is a sever build up of ice forming at the lower edge of your roof , that then forces melted water up under your roofing material , there will also be coverage . These are only two examples , so again talk to your Insurance Professional .
Good question . In most cases damage from a leaky roof would be covered but the repair to the roof itself would not be covered . Keep in mind that wear & tear is an exclusion from many policies and the insurance company may be able to deny the claim if the loss can be shown to be a result of wear & tear . However , If the roof was damaged in a storm -LRB- from a covered peril -RRB- than the leak , and the roof repair , would be covered - subject to your policy deductible .
If the leak is simply caused by wear and tear then the leak would not be covered since wear and tear and/or deterioration are not covered perils . If say for example a storm blew through blowing shingles off the roof and causing a leak this would be a covered peril .
Coverage for water damage is restricted by exclusions from the homeowners policy . if the leak is from outside water -LRB- roof , windows , -RRB- it isnt covered . If it is from a back-up of a sewer or drain , it is not covered -LRB- unless you have bought that additional coverage . -RRB- If it is from water that is coming into the house from the ground through the foundation , it is not covered . The normal scenario is that a water line bursts and floods a room or more . what you do once the leak is detected is critical in limiting damage -LRB- which is your responsibility . -RRB- Know where the water shut off valve is located in your house . Call your agent , company or a remediation contractor . Get the flow stopped . Get the water removed ; Get your property properly dried . the damage might be much less than you expect . the damage is covered after the deductible is satisfied .
This really depends on the cause of the leaky roof . If you file the claim with the insurer , they will send out an adjuster to assess the cause of the roof . If the leak is deemed to be caused by an event covered by your policy then the insurer will cover the leak . If the adjuster determines that the leak is caused by an event not covered by your policy -LRB- neglect/deferred maintenance being the most common example -RRB- than the insurer will not pay to fix the roof .
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
Homeowners Insurance usually covers water damage except as excluded on a policy ! Water Damage due to Flood Waters from outside are not covered and also the Backup of Sewers/Drains may be limited or excluded on a home insurance policy unless endorsed otherwise . If water damage is caused as a result of a leaking roof or broken interior plumbing , the damage would usually be covered . Please note : plumbing is not covered by the home insurance policy since plumbing is expected to be maintained in good condition at all times by the homeowner . A home warranty policy may be separately purchased by the homeowner for maintenance repairs including plumbing . For further details on coverage , please consult your policy booklet and/or contact a licensed representative to assist reading the policy to answer your question in detail .
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is The Best Retirement Plan ?
Selecting the best retirement plan is determined by your personal financial profile . First consideration is whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified . If your tax bracket is high and/or your employer matches some of your contributions , a qualified plan should be considered . If your tax bracket is low and your employment doesnt offer a match then non-qualified plan should be considered . Once you establish whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified , then funding your retirement with the proper product is next . To do this you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review .
The best retirement plan is the one that allows maximum pretax or tax deductible contributions with an employer match and a vast inventory of investments to choose from . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- allows up to $ 17,500 with a catch provision for those over age 50 for an additional contribution of $ 5,500 . Not all employers match , but if you 're a highly paid employee , you may able to persuade your employer to match as an employee retention benefit .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
This best type of retirement plan is one that will fund the lifestyle you want to have in retirement , weather storms and not run out before you do . The first step is to decide what retirement success means to you and then calculate what is needed to fund it . The theory behind asset allocation is to mitigate risk by using difference asset classes . In retirement planning , product allocation is using the strengths and features of different products to mitigate risk . There is no one best product . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community.If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
Where the best place to save for your retirement depends on your situation . As a general rule though a plan that has tax deferral is best . That will allow you to receive the full effect of compound interest or growth . In Canada plans like Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are tax deductible and provide tax deferred growth , they are designed specifically for retirement savings . The income is taxable when it is withdrawn . If you have a plan where your employer will contribute and perhaps match your contributions . It might a Registered Pension Plan or towards your RRSP , regardless that is hard to beat . Other option is a Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- where the contributions are not deductible , but have Tax Free growth and the money is not taxed on withdrawal . There is no cookie cutter plan or product that is best . I really depends on your individual objectives . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What a retirement plan does is provide financial security . If you are referring to a Registered Retirement Plan then then plan enjoys tax deferred growth . The income is taxed on withdrawal , but tax deferred growth allows for the full effect of compound growth . If you referring to a retirement plan , then you are working towards having what you want to happen , happen . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Get Life Insurance For Someone Else ?
To get life insurance for someone else , the other person needs to know that you are getting the policy , agree to it , and sign the application . Then they must participate in the underwriting process , whether that be take an exam , do a phone interview , or provide access to medical records , if needed . Some policies do not require any exam , medical records or phone interview . You can make yourself the Owner of the policy if you have an insurable interest in the Insured person . I.e. . You provide or pay for some of their care , you have loaned them money , they live with you , etc. . Or they can own their own policy . Either one of you can pay for it .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
If you mean , can you pay for a policy for someone else so that there will be a death benefit when they die , the answer is : usually . Most people who buy term life insurance for someone else do it to protect themselves in some way . E.g. . That other person may owe them money , or the Payer knows he/she will have the task of paying for the funeral if the other person dies . Life insurance companies look carefully if the Payer is also the Owner of a policy in which someone else is the Insured . They are not as concerned if you simply pay for a policy for someone else and allow the Insured to own their own policy .
Life insurance demonstrates that you love someone else . If your death is going to have an impact on someone you love , then life insurance can help -LRB- perhaps a great deal . -RRB- Sometimes life insurance is required to protect the interest of a lender or a contract holder -LRB- who you might not love . -RRB- In the end , though , most life insurance is purchased because people love each someone else .
Yes , you can get Life Insurance on someone else . Refer to Peggy 's comment on insurable interest . Here are a few situations which you can look at getting life insurance on someone else -LRB- keep in mind , for anyone over 18 , they have to sign the application as well -RRB- : Parent insuring children , Spousal insurance , Insuring a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee or insuring your business partner so if he passes , you can purchase his ownership from his family . If you have a situation that I did not cover here as there are more , reach out to your broker or contact one of us .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Is borrowing against a policy a good idea ? Yes , it can be , it can depend though . Keeping the policy in force is important as it creates some tax advantages on the funds borrowed as you are essentially taking a part of your death benefit early for use elsewhere . Where borrowing against your life insurance is a good idea is in what steps you have to take to do compared to other avenues . Have you ever sat in a bank office cubicle while someone else decides if your need is worthy enough ? How they have to decide if your need fits ? A great thing about borrowing against your value is you simply make a call and the money is wired to your bank account . You are not asked to explain your need , your need is not subjected to review by somebody else . Simply put , what you want to do with those funds is not subject to the approval of somebody else .
In order to buy life insurance for someone else , the person being insured must give consent to the policy , sign the application , and cooperate with underwriting requirements -LRB- be that a phone interview , exam , or whatever is asked -RRB- . It is not possible to purchase a policy for someone else without their knowing it .
If you are applying for a policy that requires an exam , there is the chance that the underwriter will want to see your medical records . As an impaired risk life insurance specialist , I have seen several cases take nearly 6 months due to the complexity , amount , and elusiveness of those applicants ' medical records . This is what I have learned , to help speed up the process . 1 -RRB- Put all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , and include the doctor who diagnosed your most serious health conditions . Delays often happen because records are received , but then the underwriter notices that the patient was referred to someone else during that time . Getting all your doctors noted at the start does not necessarily mean the insurance company will order records from all of them , but at least it gives underwriters the opportunity to pick and choose which ones they want , so they order them in a timely manner . 2 -RRB- Do your exam quickly . Putting of an exam for months sets back the whole application process . Sometimes medical records are not even ordered until the exam is done . 3 -RRB- Warn your doctor or clinic that they will be getting a request for your medical records , and ask them to fill the order ASAP . You might even want to collect your own medical records to speed things up , if that is allowed . 4 -RRB- Provide additional details in a timely manner . Sometimes insurance companies will see something on your MIB or MVR or application that will cause them to need more information . Answering that extra question , filling out that extra form , or doing whatever needs to be done , can eliminate unnecessary delays . 5 -RRB- Do n't jump to another company without talking it over with your agent first . Give him/her a chance to find out where the logjam is , and get it cleared up . If you can not get answers from your agent , it 's OK to switch , but close your first application out , or transfer it to someone else . Otherwise , you may end up applying for the same policy with two different agents , and that can cause further complications and delays .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
You can put a life insurance policy on someone else if you have an insurable interest in that person . That means that , if they passed away , it would hurt you financially . E.g. you could take out life insurance on someone to whom you loaned a large amount of money , so that you would get your money back if that person died . Life insurance companies look at immediate family relationships as an emotional loss when death occurs , which justifies financial remuneration . However , even taking out a life insurance policy on a relative will have some financial considerations in determining how much you can put on them .
No , you can not get life insurance on anybody , and not everybody can get life insurance on you . In order to get life insurance on the life of someone else , the owner of the policy must have some financial connection to that person . If it is not a close relative , an eligible person may be someone who owes you a substantial amount of money , for whom your are providing a home , or some other insurable interest . That guideline helps prevent people from taking out policies on others just to make a windfall , or even for criminal intent .
You can be listed as a driver on someone else 's auto insurance , they would need to request the addition to their policy . Adding additional drivers can cause an increase in the rate depending on the driving record of the person being added as well as their driving experience , younger less experinced drivers do tend to cause a policy to go up . If you are driving someone else 's vehicle you should look into being added to the policy .
If the policy is on you and you are owner of the policy , you can generally name whoever you want as beneficiary . If you own the policy on the life of someone else , then the beneficiary should have an insurable interest with the insured -LRB- e.g. you buy a policy on your child and name their live in partner as beneficiary -RRB- . If you are able to purchase a policy on someone else , you already have an insurable interest in the insured , so can be the beneficiary yourself , in most situations . Keep in mind that different life insurance companies can have different determinations of what is allowed . Check with a broker beforehand to find out which carriers will work with you to set up the type of policy arrangement you need , or to set up your policy in another way to accomplish your goals .
There are two parts of an auto policy that provide for physical damage coverage , one part for you and one part for someone else . The first covers your car and that is the coverage that is found in Collision and Comprehensive elements of your policy . These are subject to your policy deductible . The second element is the liability coverage you have in case you cause an accident and damage someone else 's car or other property . A deductible does not apply in this settlement .
Policy ownership is what determines whether the policy is included in a person 's estate for estate tax purposes . Having someone else own the policy will keep it out of the estate , but you also lose some control . The owner , not the insured , has control over the policy , so having someone else own the policy can be risky . Irrevocable Life Insurance Trusts could be used in large estates , but is overkill for most people . Keeping the life insurance out of your estate for tax reasons may not be a big issue but it depends on the total size of your estate and what trade-offs you are willing to accept to keep the insurance out of your estate .
Life insurance empowers you . We all know that the policy pays out when you die . Therefore , in order to buy it , you have to face the fact that this event will some day take place . Guaranteed . Thats a scary thought , and most people dont like to think it . They prefer to think about other fun stuff . When it comes to financial products , they want to put as much money as possible into their pocket . Not somebody elses . And yet that is what you are doing when you buy life insurance : thinking about somebody elses financial welfare . So you not only look your own mortality right in the face and accept it , but you rise above it and take care of somebody else . Someone you love , and care for , and for whom you want nothing but the best . Life insurance helps you be altruistic and benevolent to the highest degree . And you know what ? That is a great way to be .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is An Open Access Health Insurance Plan ?
Specific carriers can use the term `` Open Access '' to mean specific things on their plans . For example , Aetna has a grouping of plans called `` Managed Choice Open Access '' . Generally , Open Access simply means that you can see a specialist without having to get a referral from a primary care doctor first .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Specific carriers can use the term `` Open Access '' to mean specific things on their plans . For example , Aetna has a grouping of plans called `` Managed Choice Open Access '' . Generally , Open Access simply means that you can see a specialist without having to get a referral from a primary care doctor first .
It will depend upon what level of health insurance you purchase . Assuming you purchase major medical health insurance , it will now have to be in compliance with the Affordable Care Act . That said , what you may be purchasing can range from a `` Platinum '' level plan with very low out-of-pocket expenses for virtually all areas of health care to a `` Bronze '' plan that may not provide you any coverage at all until you have paid for more than $ 6000 in health care expenses out of your own pocket . One thing that is consistent across the four levels of health insurance plans now available -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum -RRB- is that a wide range of preventive health care services will be covered at 100 % with no cost sharing by the subscriber . Yes , you are also buying `` peace of mind '' that in the event of a serious illness or injury that your personal financial exposure is limited to that $ 6000 + number each year -LRB- which will increase in future years -RRB- and you also are now buying guaranteed access to health insurance with no pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . In the abstract I think everyone agrees that these are good things . However , depending upon your income level what you may be buying may or may not be viewed by the individual as affordable to them . Having recently completed the first open enrollment season under ObamaCare it has surprised me how many people , even ones qualifying for substantial subsidies of their monthly health insurance premiums , still elected to remain uninsured . Clearly , the perceived value proposition of what you get from buying health insurance has a very subject answer that varies greatly from one person to the next .
Life insurance is not taxable in California , but even more importantly , it is a great way to increase the value of your estate . The wealthy learned long ago , that income tax is a tax free way to increase your net worth . By putting money into Equity Indexed Universal Life Insurance , from National Life Group , sold by Premier Financial Alliance , your assets can grow as the stock market grows , but NEVER go down , when the market drops ! It is really a no brainer . And then you can access your money as a loan , tax free , so long as you keep your policy open . When you die , your beneficiary gets the death benefit still in your open policy . You can even access the money for any reason during your lifetime . The death benefit will even be paid to YOU while you are still living , if you develop a chronic , critical or terminal illness . Others will say they have living benefits , but try and find anyone with all of our benefits . We were the first and we continue to be Number One . Thank you . GARY LANE . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
If you are already on Medicare part A and B and havent a supplemental plan you should start shopping for a plan . There is an open enrollment period and that will allow you access if you have existing health concerns . If you qualify you can start a plan outside the open enrollment period .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Medica started in 1975 by a group of physicians for the purpose of becoming a Physicians Health Plan . They offer coverage in Minnesota and select counties in Wisconsin , North Dakota and South Dakota . According to Medica , `` It was the first open-access health plan in the state . In 1991 , PHP merged with Share to become Medica . And in 1994 , Medica merged with HealthSpan to form Allina Health System , an integrated organization offering both health care coverage and medical services . Medica became an independent health plan in 2001 '' . In 2010 , Medica reported $ 4 Billion in revenue and that `` 90 % of fully insured premium revenue was used to pay for health care expenses '' . Medica states that over 96 % of Minnesota 's providers participate in the program and they offer a large national network of over 660,000 providers and 5,100 hospitals to it 's members . Resources : Medica.com
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
An auto insurance company wants to close every open claim . To close a claim they must collect all the pertinent information . What may appear to be an open and shut case might be complicated . One common problem is that the driver whose car strikes yours acknowledges responsibility at the scene of an accident then later decides that it was your fault . This can slow down proceedings considerably . You have access to the adjuster and your agent . You should be able to move the claim along unless it is stalled by something outside your control .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
The gates open at midnight November 15th , 2014 and run through February 15th , 2015 . Nothing says holiday season to me like health insurance open enrollment , but at least now you can make some plans for your off time this Thanksgiving and Christmas . Absent a change of life status event -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth , etc. -RRB- between now and then , any person who has n't gotten health insurance by the March 31 , 2014 end of open enrollment is locked out of the individual health insurance marketplace . While it is too early -LRB- mid-May 2014 -RRB- to know exactly what health insurance plans will look like and cost for 2015 , the general assessment is that the vast majority of marketplaces will see rates go up -LRB- though perhaps not as high as some feared -RRB- , health plan product designs will be added and removed from the marketplace based upon what carriers learned in the first year of ObamaCare , some carriers will withdraw while other carriers are deciding to enter or expand their marketplace presences . In short , the health insurance world is getting more complicated not less . Seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker representing all carriers early on in your search process . It should cost you nothing and save you a lot of headaches .
It really depends on how good your health is -LRB- do you go to the doctor a lot ? have lots of prescriptions ? upcoming surgery ? -RRB- and what your income is . If you fall into the income level whereby you get subsidy , you most likely want to go with a silver plan . A lot of self-employed individuals like to go with an HSA plan because this enables them to open up Health Savings Account with pre-tax dollars and use the account to pay for their health expenses . Some people are more comfortable with a `` straight co-pay '' plan so they know how much they will pay each time they access the system . It 's very individual . If you 'd like to give me a call , I 'd be happy to help . Sandy Callin , A&B Insurance/Florida Blue 727-512-9508
An affidavit of spousal health insurance is a legal document that may be required by an employer or governmental health plan -LRB- such as a state 's Children 's Health Insurance Plan or CHIP -RRB- that documents if the employee or applicant 's spouse is employed and if they are eligible for or covered by their employer 's group health insurance plan . This form will be used to determine if the spouse is eligible for enrollment or determine that their employer 's plan will pay in a primary capacity -LRB- pays the claim first -RRB- and the other employer 's plan or the government based health plan will pay in a secondary capacity -LRB- paying on any unpaid balance after the primary insurance carrier has paid on a claim -RRB- . Expect to see these types of forms in your workplace or if you or a family member are accessing public health insurance programs . Increasing numbers of employers , both private sector and public sector , are making efforts to move dependent spouses who have access to health insurance elsewhere off of their plans and onto the spouse 's employer 's plan . Increasingly an additional premium penalty is being applied to employees who insist on covering a spouse who has coverage available through another employer or source . And , in the more extreme circumstances some employers are declining to cover spouses at all . These actions are a result of the increasing costs of health care that employers and governmental agencies are experiencing and to a quirk in the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- that does not define a spouse as a dependent . Unfortunately , this is what happens when politician 's pass a law without reading it as was the case with the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act .
Pre-Existing Conditions are no longer an issue . The issue is now Open Enrollment . Let me explain . The Affordable Care Act made pre-existing conditions obsolete ; you can get health insurance no matter what condition you may have . However , you must buy health insurance during open enrollment , which ended April 15th . Now you ca n't get individual health insurance until January 1 , 2015 -LRB- open enrollment starts again November 15th -RRB- . There are certain exceptions that will allow you to get health insurance outside open enrollment such as the loss of employer coverage , marriage , divorce , etc. .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
I will presume that your question refers to individual health insurance coverage . Now that we are into 2014 and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- provisions for individual and small group health insurance are fully in effect your freedom of movement as a health insurance buyer is rather severely restricted . Outside of the new annual open enrollment period changing your health insurance carrier in mid-policy year is only allowed under limited circumstances . Change of life status events -LRB- which I have addressed in previous questions on that topic - please see my past answer history -RRB- , financial failure of the health insurance carrier you selected , or defrauding the consumer are virtually the only ways a person can change insurance carriers mid-stream . So , if you got on HealthCare.Gov during the last open enrollment period , purchased a health insurance plan because you liked the monthly premium but did n't bother to do your research and learn that your doctor 's , hospital or pharmacies are n't in-network providers then this is a classic example of `` Let The Buyer Beware '' and you will have to live with your choice until next year 's open enrollment when you can switch carriers . This is why the individual health insurance consumer should seek out the services of a qualified health insurance agent who can explain all the subtle details in today 's health insurance plans that the average consumer could quite possibly miss .
Please forgive any grammar or punctuation mistakes as I am using talk to text on my phone . So much has changed since this question was asked . More than ever before comma it is vital , understand I 'm emphasizing vital Kama that you understand how your network actually works . In my home state for the first time in 2016 we had Network types other than a PPO available . One called an EPO and the other a POS . Other than true emergencies there is no coverage outside of the network service area with many , if not all , of these types of Networks . The definition of emergency is very Grey . What you may think is an emergency may not be viewed as such by the insurance carrier . Depending on what 's available in your state I would suggest buying a PPO or HMO if at all possible . Although the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum typically doubles when you go out of network with these type of plans , it 's much better than being stuck with 100 % of the bill . If your agents is not specifically , and accurately comma scrubbing the doctors and hospitals that you wish to access during the buying process - fire that agent !! Access . Access . Access . Do n't you want to buy something that is worth the money you pay every month ? Please understand your network . Please pay a little extra for a network that includes as many doctors and hospitals as possible . A network that possibly has Nationwide access to the Top Doctors and hospitals . If you have any questions , please reach out . - gravy
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For Symbicort ?
Symbicort is an inhaled steroid used to provide symptomatic relief for severe asthma and COPD patients . Symbicort is not a rescue inhaler . Medicare Part D will cover most outpatient medications including Symbicort . Each Part D plan is different . Check the formulary and compare total costs before assuming your have coverage for Symbicort .
Symbicort is an inhaled steroid used to provide symptomatic relief for severe asthma and COPD patients . Symbicort is not a rescue inhaler . Medicare Part D will cover most outpatient medications including Symbicort . Each Part D plan is different . Check the formulary and compare total costs before assuming your have coverage for Symbicort .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare coinsurance is the amount you must pay after satisfying your Medicare Part A or Part B deductible . Medicare Part A has a per admission deductible -LRB- $ 1184 in 2013 -RRB- . After paying your deductible most hospital charges are covered by Medicare for the first 60 days . After that Medicare pays a portion and you pay the rest -LRB- coinsurance -RRB- . Medicare Part B also has a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- . After that , Medicare pays 80 % of approved plans and you pay the coinsurance , or the remaining 20 % .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Medicare pays the hospice provider for your hospice care . Theres nodeductible . Youll pay : No more than $ 5 for each prescription drug and other similarproducts for pain relief and symptom control .5 % of the Medicare-approved amount for inpatient respitecare.For example , if Medicare pays $ 100 per day for inpatient respitecare , youll pay $ 5 per day . The amount you pay for respite carecan change each year . You can get Medicare hospice benefits when you meet all of theseconditions : You 're eligible for Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- . Your doctor and the hospice medical director certify thatyou 're terminally ill and have 6 months or less to live if yourillness runs its normal course.You sign a statement choosing hospice care instead of otherMedicare-covered benefits to treat your terminal illness . -LRB- Medicare will still pay for covered benefits for any healthproblems that are n't related to your terminal illness . -RRB- You get care from a Medicare-approved hospice program .
Medicare is administered by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMMS -RRB- . This is a division of Social Security charged with setting the rules and guidelines of Medicare and Medicare related matters . Original Medicare , Medicare Advantage Plans , and Medicare Prescription Drug Plans fall under this umbrella . If you are in original Medicare then Medicare will pay any claims . If you select a Medicare Advantage Plan , then Medicare pays the insurance company to administer the claims .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
ABN stays for Advanced Benificiary Notice of Noncoverage . A doctor or Medcare provide may give you an ABN if they believe Medicare may not pay for the service you require . The ABN lists the services and items that Medicare isn ; ' t expected to pay for , an estimate of their cost and what Medicare may not pay for them . There are 3 options for you to choose from on the ABN form . 1 . You want the item or service , the provider may ask you to pay for them but you want a claim submitted to Medicare . The claim may be denied , you may be responsible to pay the provider but you can file an appeal to Medicare . Option 2 : You want the items or service but you do not want the provider to make a claim to Medicare . You may be asked to pay for the items or serivce now . Since the provider did not file a cliam to Medicare you can not file an appeal . Option 3 : You do not want the item or servce trhat may not be paid for by Medicare .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Who Has To Have Health Insurance Under Obamacare ?
Most Americans that are under age 65 and not listed as an an insured under a parent 's policy must purchase coverage . There are , of course , exceptions , including persons that are covered under Medicaid or Medicare and visitors to the country that are not US citizens . Since there is a tax imposed for persons that do n't carry coverage -LRB- that are legally required -RRB- , it is best to utilize an experienced broker to help shop for the best prices . You 'll save time and money ! And you 'll avoid that pesky tax !
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
No , not really . If you are talking about the individual health insurance market then your freedom of movement has been severely restricted by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . So , outside of the annual open enrollment period each year you can only change your health insurance coverage if you experience a change of life status event or special election period as defined under ObamaCare . Some examples are getting married or divorced , having a child or moving to another state or outside your current carrier 's service area in your state . Similar restrictions apply if you are covered under a group health plan that offers multiple options or one of the new private health insurance exchanges that some companies are moving to . An increasingly common situation that many consumers are being or will be faced with is finding out that their favorite physician is no longer participating in the provider network of the health insurance plan they enrolled in . Cancelling your coverage to switch to a new insurance carrier in mid-year that does have your doctor as an in-network provider wo n't meet the criteria for a change of life status event or a special election period . You could cancel your old coverage but you would have to wait until the next open enrollment period and the first of the year to get new individual health insurance . Failure to pay your monthly insurance premium is also not a qualifying event and can leave you out in the cold until the next enrollment period so do n't think about that as a strategy to change insurance carriers in mid-stream . While this was tied into a continuation of coverage under COBRA issue , I recently witnessed a heartbreaking example of this situation . I received a frantic call from the girlfriend of a man who has terminal cancer . At first she was unsure as to his last day of being covered under his employer 's plan and whether he had continued his coverage under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . In fact , the initial information she gave me was that he had not continued his group coverage and was still within the 60-day window that a person has to purchase individual coverage after losing their employer based coverage . If this had been the case , even though the man was being treated for terminal cancer I would have been able to enroll him in major medical coverage that would have had to cover his care immediately . After digging into this man 's situation more deeply we discovered that he had elected to continue his coverage under his former employer 's plan , had paid the first month 's premium by check but had then failed to make his second month 's premium payment and had his COBRA coverage cancelled due to non-payment . The fact that this man was undergoing intensive chemo & radiation therapy and being given massive doses of pain medications made it understandable as to how he missed making that second premium payment but that did n't stop the COBRA plan administrator from terminating him for non-payment . Unfortunately , as cancellation of coverage for non-payment of premium is not a qualifying event the individual major medical carriers were within their rights to decline him for coverage until the next open enrollment period and coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . This has left the man uninsured at the worst possible time and has his friends and family raising money for his care . If he is still alive by the first of the year I 'll be able to get him coverage but his life expectancy is not that great but the bills he is accumulating are .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
No . ObamaCare is a name that has become attached to a law passed in 2010 called the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- , it is also sometimes referred to as the `` Affordable Care Act '' . This legislation was a centerpiece of the Obama administration 's political agenda and it significantly re-engineered the health insurance industry through such actions as making policies guaranteed to be issued , eliminating pre-existing condition exclusions and limitations , requiring that all policies cover certain `` Minimum Essential Benefits '' and creating Federal or State run health insurance marketplaces to facilitate the purchasing of health insurance and perhaps subsidizing the cost of health insurance policies for people below 400 % of the Federal Poverty Line . ObamaCare itself provides no health insurance coverage . That is still a function of health insurance companies now operating under the requirements of ObamaCare .
Obamacare is working well in California . Obamacare was intended to help Americans who could not previously afford health insurance get insured . People with bad health -LRB- heart disease , obesity , cancer -RRB- often were denied coverage or charged a very high premium . Now these folks are charged the same rate as everyone else . People with low income were often priced out of the insurance market as well . It was not reasonable to expect a person making $ 25,000 a year to spend 15 % of their income on health insurance . Under ObamaCare people making under $ 48,000 per year are eligible for premium assistance . WEBSITELINK - In this video I show you how a 30 year old earning $ 25,000 per year can get a policy for just $ 18 per month .
There are multiple ways to get health insurance for you and your family and , depending on where you live , a wide array of options for health insurance coverage types and cost points . With the implementation of the ObamaCare requirements individual health insurance plans and costs have been transformed dramatically and the consumer needs to exercise great care in making their health plan selection . My first and best recommendation is to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance coverage both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace in your state of residence . There can be much more involved in a health insurance plan than what a bullet points overview of the plan 's benefits are and its monthly premium . A knowledgeable health insurance agent can explain if a given plan covers you if you go outside its network , if it has a broad or a narrow pharmacy network , if the plan 's medical deductible applies per person covered or is aggregated for the family , and a whole lot of other things you should know before making your purchasing decision . Under ObamaCare if you purchase a health insurance plan you later learn you do n't like it 's not just a simple matter of cancelling your coverage and enrolling with another insurance carrier . So , buyer beware . If you and your family have income levels below 100 % or 138 % -LRB- depending upon the state you live in -RRB- of the Federal Poverty Level then you will qualify for coverage under your state 's Medicaid plan . In that event you need to contact your state government 's Medicaid office . Of course , there is the HealthCare.gov web site that you can go to and shop for coverage and enroll online . Quite frankly , while HealthCare.gov has improved somewhat over last year 's rocky start , I find most consumers still have a hard time truly understanding the information as it is presented on HealthCare.gov and they still need a knowledgeable person to explain the differences between various plan offerings and how to approach the subsidy process . Also , there are other online sites available , some with telephonic support to help answer a person 's questions . This can be kind of crap shoot though as you may or may not be talking to someone who understands the details of your particular location 's health plan options and they are n't doing much more than reading you a summary off of their own computer screen . So , remember , health insurance is still a very local product and varies from state to state and even within different areas within a state . You will be best served to deal with someone who is more locally based in most cases .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Obviously that will depend upon who the next President is . Your question probably assumes a Republican President being elected and the current Republican control of the House and Senate continuing after the 2016 elections . A possible outcome that is a distinct possibility . Now , ask yourself , `` How many Federal laws have I seen totally repealed in my lifetime ? '' I think most people would be hard pressed to name any and this is because it is relatively rare . A new entitlement system that already has several million people involved in it has been created as has a new bureaucracy to administer it . These are hard to end . The next President will inherit these `` facts on the ground '' when they take office regardless of their political persuasion . Even a Republican seen as having a clear electoral mandate to end Obamacare will be faced with the daunting political , social and , unfortunately , racial challenges that would be associated with unwinding such an enormous program . A type of political courage that has not been demonstrated in Washington in quite some time would be required to push through a total repeal . And , then there are the uncomfortable questions that have to be faced . 1 -RRB- Do we truly want to go back to the way things were in health insurance before ObamaCare ? -LRB- for example , should pre-existing condition exclusions be allowed to return ? -RRB- and , 2 -RRB- If not , what would we keep and what would we remove from ObamaCare to `` fix '' it ? This is purely opinion , but , looking at the practical challenges involved and the fact that ObamaCare is already injected into the health insurance/healthcare system now , the path of least resistance will be the `` Fix It '' route . Whether it was a President Paul or Cruz -LRB- Trump might be another case altogether -RRB- I really ca n't see them announcing on TV that everyone 's subsidies were being ended immediately and that they would be seeing their health insurance rates increase by hundreds of dollars per month and `` good luck '' . It might not be political suicide but it would be one heck of a headache . Some sort of transitional approach coupled with new solutions would have to be devised to minimize further disruptions in people 's lives and to the healthcare/health care financing industries . So , as much as we may wish that ObamaCare had never arrived , it has . Being realistic , whether it is fixing it , replacing it or totally undoing it , none of those things will happen immediately and the most likely scenario is one where some aspects of the law are retained and others are jettisoned or modified over time . This means that the months and years ahead are almost guaranteed to be as chaotic and subject to rapid and repeated change as what we have experienced during the previous five years . Answer provided by Marlin McKelvy , Chartered Benefits Consultant and president of Consumer Directed Benefit Solutions insurance agency with over 30 years of employee benefits experience serving the insurance needs of businesses and individuals in Tennessee , Arkansas and Mississippi .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Earthquakes ?
It can provided that you have talked to your Insurance Professional and have had the coverage endorsed onto your policy . In most standard policies , damage caused by earth movement , earthquake in your example or sink holes as another , is excluded . However , in many if not most cases this coverage can be included by endorsement .
Most if not all standard Homeowners Insurance policies list a couple of pretty common exclusions in the language of the contract . Earth movement is one of these common exclusions . That certainly included earthquake damage but also includes sink holes , any form of erosion etc. . This coverage can usually be endorsed onto your Homeowners ' contract however . The other common exclusion is Flood . Unlike earth movement , flood coverage can never be endorsed on a homeowners policy . The coverage is only available by the purchase of a separate Flood Insurance policy .
Earth movement is usually excluded in a homeowners policy . In California insurance companies are required to periodically offer homeowners earthquake coverage . This is generally written as an additional coverage or placed with specialty insurance companies . In some instances the cost for the coverage is greater than the standard homeowners policy .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Damages caused by the peril of earthquake under a homeowner policy are generally excluded from coverage . However coverage can be obtained in most States by purchasing either an endorsement to the homeowner policy for earthquake coverage or by acquiring a separate policy , specifically covering the peril of earthquake . Since some States and even regions within States are considerably more vulnerable to earthquakes , obviously the rates for this type of coverage varies widely . It can be expensive but your home is probably your most valuable personal investment . Consult with your local independent agencies for additional details to fit your particular situation and locality . .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
Earth movement is an excluded peril in most homeowners policies . Some insurance companies will provide earthquake insurance as an option . The companies are required by state law in some states to provide a quote and access to earthquake insurance . The premium for earthquake insurance in a known fault area can equal the premium for the homeowners policy .
Home Insurance , Hazard Insurance or Property Insurance are synonymous general terms . 1 - 4 unit homes are usually protected by a Homeowners Insurance Policy -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy -LRB- Tenant Occupied -RRB- . The Homeowners Insurance Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others most commonly written on Form HO-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . The Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Loss of Rent , and Premises Liabilitymost commonly written on Form DP-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
A standard Renters Insurance policy does not cover the peril of earthquake . Renters Insurance will protect the insured 's personal belongings up to the policy limits provided . Some insurance carriers in various States will allow the addition of an Endorsement to include the peril of earthquake to the policy thereby including protection to your personal belongings that may be damaged by an Earthquake .
In most cases no . If your policy includes earthquake and the damage is a result of the earthquake then there may be coverage , Homeowners insurance covers things like fire , lightening , hail wind , and other covered perils . They are not designed to cover normal deterioration and settling . Check with your agent to see what your policy covers .
In California earthquake coverage must be offered every two years to the insured . It is not automatically covered . Earthquakes are relatively common in some parts of California and the cost for earthquake insurance reflects that frequency and the severity of the claims experienced in a given area . The coverage frequently has a reduced limit and a different deductible for earthquake related damage .
The section of the policy that will likely answer the question the best will be found in the `` Exclusions '' . In the ISO Homeowner Form 3 -LRB- HO3 -RRB- policy , emulated by most insurers if not used directly , and the most common form of homeowner insurance issued in the USA , is the form I take this information from . It says : Collapse , Settling , subsidence , earth movement -LRB- unless endorsed otherwise -RRB- , landslide , mudslide , mudflow , sinkhole , or any other impact of the earth sinking , rising or shifting that impact the foundation structure , walls , footings or floor are specifically excluded . An exception is made for the impact of losses caused by fire but only to the extent caused by the fire . In other words , if a fire ensues and the building eventually collapses , it is covered to the extent the damage was caused due to the damage of fire . There are certainly regional exceptions . In Ohio , due to past mining activity , subsidence has to be offered in various counties -LRB- but does not need to be purchased -RRB- . Florida has a problem with sinkholes and may have state mandated coverage changes . California has issues with earthquake and almost certainly requires at least the offer of earthquake insurance . Check with your local insurance representative for the advice that fits your particular locality .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Earthquake damage is not covered by most home insurance policies . Earthquake coverage can be added to a policy through what is called a rider or endorsement . The cost depends on the likelihood of an earthquake .
Home insurance is not mandatory in California . But any financial institution that loans you money to buy real property can require you carry HO insurance . If you fail to procure a policy , they will buy one for you and charge you for that . Also , if your property is located in the flood zone area , the same lender may also require you buying flood insurance . The only thing I have n't seen required from the Homeowner is an earthquake insurance . However , we strongly suggest you review you options . Nowadays , with theCalifornia Earthquake Authority -LRB- CEA -RRB- this coverage became much more affordable than before .
It depends on the reason the foundation needs repaired . It may cover it if the damage was done by a covered peril . If however it is just due to age and ground water then no . If your policy covers Earthquake and the damage is due to Earthquake for example then your policy may provide some coverage . If you think you have damage that may be covered check with your agent .
Good Question . Earthquake coverage is typically not afforded under a renters policy in New York State . In other areas of the country it may be different - especially those areas that are susceptible to earthquakes . I do know of a few insurance companies that will add earthquake coverage on to the policy , however it can be costly . Hope this helps .
Thereare a fewdifferent types of homeowners insurance policys out there and eachinsurance company in Nevadaoffer different coverages and limits in these policys . The most common homeowners policy used is called a HO4 policy which pretty much all major insurance companies are using . This type of policy means that any peril will be covered unless it is excluded on the policy . These exclusions are pretty standard in Nevadawhich someexamples would be earthquake , war , riot and nuclear warfare . This policy provides coverage for spearate structures , personal property , building codes , Loss of Use , medical and personal liability . The limits for these coverages are a percentage based off the amount that is determined to rebuild the home . If you would like to know more about what a homeowners policy covers please contact me and I will be happy to explain any of these in more detail .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can My Auto Insurance Deny A Claim ?
In a heart beat . Just give them the opportunity . Actually , your auto policy is a extremely broad insurance policy and there truly are very few claims denied due to most claims are covered risk of loses . But if you are one of the weak bad boy characters and cause the loss directly or running form the in and out with a gun and wade of gum with a cartoon of cigs then you , my friend , are up the proverbial creek and NO ONE IS GOING TO GIVE YOU A HAND.Any vehicle used in a felony is just flat out of luck -LRB- that includes running moonshine irregardless of what the tv show implies -RRB- .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
Any insurer can deny a claim . For auto insurance and other forms of property/casualty insurance , the majority of the real underwriting takes place after a claim is filed . The insurer will send an adjuster to assess the situation and check facts that were given to the insurer . If the insurer discovers a circumstance that was misrepresented and would have prevented them from offering you a policy , or if they discover that the reason for your claim is not covered by the policy , the insurer will deny the claim .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Usually , upon presentation of proof of death and a claim form , the claim is paid . However , a claim could be denied , depending on circumstances . In Canada , a claim within the first 2 years could be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . This essentially means you did not tell or disclose the truth on something that would have changed an underwriting decision . After 2 years you would have to have committed fraud which is much more difficult to prove . A life insurance contract should be approached as a contract of utmost good faith where all parties give full disclosure . In other words , be sure and tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Suicide within the first 2 years or last reinstatement would also cause a claim to be denied . If there was an accidental death rider , then that portion of the claim would not be paid unless the death is deemed accidental . . Laws are similar , but vary by jurisdiction . You should check the wording in your policy , your local insurance act and , if necessary , a lawyer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Your auto insurance company can deny your claim , although most claims tend to be approved . For example , if you fraudulently filed a claim , or attempted to recover damages on a vehicle that you did not drive or own , surely , the claim would be denied . If you pet was attempting to drive your vehicle and hit a stop sign , then do n't expect a check from your insurer . When in doubt , an experienced broker can explain the entire claims process , how long it takes and what the likely outcome is going to be .
Any insurer can deny a claim . For auto insurance and other forms of property/casualty insurance , the majority of the real underwriting takes place after a claim is filed . The insurer will send an adjuster to assess the situation and check facts that were given to the insurer . If the insurer discovers a circumstance that was misrepresented and would have prevented them from offering you a policy , or if they discover that the reason for your claim is not covered by the policy , the insurer will deny the claim .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
Life insurance policies are rarely voided . There is a specified period , normally two years , during which the company can deny a death claim if it is determined that the applicant made false representations on the application . I chose the word representation deliberately . An applicant is only bound by their personal knowledge and is therefore not responsible for any diagnosis made after the application is taken . The answers to questions are based upon the knowledge of the applicant not the actual state of affairs . One of the symptoms of alcoholism is denial and if the applicant does not believe themselves to be an alcoholic and no medical professional has diagnosed them as being an alcoholic , the insurance company would be hard pressed to ever deny a claim in the first two years . After the first two years pass the company can not deny a claim .
Life insurance claims can be denied but it is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . If death was by suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy , the claim will be investigated . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in very limited circumstances of fraud .
Life insurance companies issue contracts . There are requirements for the company and there are requirements for the customer . If the customer commits suicide in the first couple of years most companies can , by contract , deny the death benefit . If there has been an attempt to defraud the company the claim can be denied . Very few claims are denied . Law suits often accompany a denial .
Life insurance claims are usually not denied , especially if the policy has been in force for over 2 years . If a policy has not been inforce for two years , a claim may be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . Which means you did not disclose fully something that could have affected the underwriting of the policy . Not declaring you were a smoker for example . Or if death is by suicide the claim will be denied if within 2 years -LRB- In Canada -RRB- If the policy is over 2 years old the insurance company has to prove fraud which is difficult to prove . If the policy contains exclusion such as death while skydiving , no coverage for that event . If you have any further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In addition to the excellent explanations offered by the other agents on this page , life insurance claims are sometimes denied due to the nature of the policy . If you purchase a graded policy , it will pay a reduced benefit for death due to natural causes during the first 1-4 years . With that type of policy , death due to accident will usually pay 100 % from day one . Sometimes accidental death is actually caused by a health condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack while driving a car -RRB- . When the claim is denied , it can come as a surprise because survivors were not aware that the policy was a graded during the first two years , and/or that the root cause of death was determined to be natural vs accidental . The same is true for people who think they are buying life insurance , when they are actually buying accidental death insurance . You need to be very careful about what type of policy you are getting so that your claim is not denied simply because you purchased the wrong type of policy . A final , common reason for denial of claims is late premium payments . In our office , we spend a lot of time each week reminding people whose policies have entered the grace period , that they need to pay their premium or lose their coverage . But many agencies due not send reminders , and it is easy to lose track of addresses , phone numbers , and email address of clients because people change those frequently in today 's society . At the very least , keep your address up to date with the insurance company so that you will receive any late notices and keep your policy in force for the time of need .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Health Insurance Quickly ?
The quickest way to get health insurance is to find an independent agent that can show you quotes from the major insurance carriers and match a plan to your needs . Many people prefer to start by running a health insurance quote online and then ask questions after they have reviewed the information . You can go to our website to run a quote and in the `` other '' section you will be able to run a quote for the under age 65 market . If you are turning 65 or older you can run a medicare supplement quote from our home page . Either way , it will give you an instant snap shot of what plans are available to you . The key is to follow up with an agent to save you time trying to figure out which plan might work better for your specific family situation .
That is an excellent question ! There are a couple of things that will determine how quickly you can obtain your license . The first is how quickly you can become enrolled in , and complete your State required training class . -LRB- There may also be company required training that you might need to complete before being able to sell , btw ... -RRB- You will also need to schedule and take your State exam , and get your fingerprinting and background checks done . It is a really wise idea to look into getting your Errors & Omissions insurance while in the process also , so that you can hit the ground running once licensed . So depending upon how well you learn and test , and how easy it is to get everything scheduled , you can expect your licensing within a couple of weeks , to a cople of months . If you would like to know how it went for me , please contact me , and I 'll talk to you privately about it . Thank you for asking !
Getting life insurance can take from one day to several months . If you are getting a policy that does not require a physical and that can be signed digitally , it can be in effect in as short as a day . If you are applying for a large policy and have health conditions that require the gathering of medical records , the process can take much longer . The determining factor is often how quickly the doctor records are received , how quickly the exam is completed , and whether the underwriter adds additional requirements after doing their review .
With some No Exam policies , you can have life insurance set up and in effect within 24 hours . With policies that require an exam , it largely depends on : 1 -RRB- how quickly you do your exam , 2 -RRB- whether medical records are ordered , and 3 -RRB- if medical records are ordered , how quickly they are received by the life insurance companies . If you have a health condition that requires getting records from several doctors , do not be alarmed if the process takes 3-5 months . Keep in mind that the more thoroughly your health history is reviewed , the chances are nearly zero that your payment would be declined if death occurred during the policy 's first two years -LRB- the contestibility period -RRB- . However , even with a health condition , medically underwritten policies do not normally take that long . Working with a reputable agency who keeps you up to date during underwriting can cut down the time a lot .
Filling out the life insurance application itself takes about 30 minutes for a medically underwritten policy -LRB- one that requires a paramed exam -RRB- . Having your drivers license , the date of birth and possibly Social Security numbers of your beneficiaries , and all your doctors ' information on hand will save time in filling it out . Once the application is submitted , you will take your free exam in your home or other place of your choice . Sometimes medical records are ordered . The time it takes complete the process depends partly on how quickly you take your exam and how quickly records are obtained . If you apply for a policy without an exam , the policy is issued much more quickly .
No , you ca n't get life insurance on your dad without his consent . If you are trying to secure some funding for final expenses when your father passes away , here are some tips that might help him consent to your purchasing coverage on him . 1 -RRB- Tell him you love him , and what a good provider he has been for your family . 2 -RRB- Maybe bring up a situation that caused you to think of buying life insurance for him . E.g. . When a friend or uncle died . And how it got you to thinking about what you would do if your father died . 3 -RRB- Explain that life insurance pays a death benefit quickly , without going through probate . This allows survivors to pay bills quickly and focus on supporting one another , rather than worrying about how to pay the bill . 4 -RRB- Use a simplified or guaranteed issue policy that does not ask a lot of health questions and does not need an exam . If you use a policy that pays the death benefit from day one , you will need to get your father 's health history . If guaranteed issue policy , it will be graded , but he can not be declined . 5 -RRB- Make sure he understands what will be required , be that a phone interview , drafting from his checking account -LRB- unless you are paying the premium -RRB- , etc. . With guaranteed issue policies , nothing is required but his signature on the application .
That depends on how quickly the requirements for proof of death are met and if there were any extenuating circumstances that would require investigation . Most companies are going to make the within a relatively short period of time . They want family members to be able to get on with their lives less financial burdens as quickly as possible . To find out how your life insurance policy is handled , call your local agent and discuss it with them .
It can take from hours to months to be approved for life insurance . If you are applying for a simplified issue policy that requires no exam or medical records , can be signed digitally and approved on the phone , it may go into effect very quickly . The cons : this type of policy does not dig too deep , and can decline you very easily if you do not fit their exact criteria . They also usually charge higher rates to cover the risk of not knowing everything about you . The pros are that you get by without the hassle of an exam and can get the coverage very quickly . When applying for a larger policy that does require an exam and medical records , the time in underwriting largely depends on when you schedule your exam and how long it takes for your doctor 's office to send your records to the life insurance company . Another thing that can hold up approval is if you saw a doctor that the underwriter wants input from , but records were not ordered from that doctor , or the doctor has left and no one knows where those records are . Finally , an insurance website or agency that is not skilled at working this type of case can slow things down by simply not knowing how to stay on top of cases like this . To speed up approvals for a case involving exam and medical records : 1 -RRB- use an agent who has experience in impaired risk underwriting ; 2 -RRB- list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , and all doctors who made your diagnoses ; 3 -RRB- schedule your exam ASAP ; 4 -RRB- notify your doctors that medical records will be ordered , or obtain the records yourself ; and 5 -RRB- answer all questions from your agent and/or case manager promptly . These tips can cut the time for approval , even in a complicated case , from months to weeks .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
No one will be able to give you a perfect answer to this question until we have 2015 in the rear view mirror . Health insurance costs have always varied from state to state and ObamaCare has made the contrast between states quite stark in some cases . Combine this with the fact that how individual health insurance products were designed , rated and sold all underwent the biggest simultaneous change in the industry 's history and you have a situation where the entire health insurance marketplace has been turned upside down and we have a very foggy situation . In general terms , most individual consumers should anticipate at least a 10 % increase in their 2015 rates and be prepared to shop their coverage . Your results in your state may be quite different and it is not uncommon for some people to be receiving significantly higher rates increases . Rate filings for 2015 paint a confusing picture . Some state 's are reporting very moderate 2015 rate changes but those were also often the same states whose 2014 rates jumped the most . So , perhaps these state 's overpriced in year 1 of ObamaCare and the fact that they were only slightly off even then is n't exactly cause for cheer . Other states are seeing much higher rate increases for 2015 . Another factor complicating the cost picture are the government health insurance marketplaces themselves . Because of government administrative policies , the insurance carrier who has the second lowest cost Silver level product in each marketplace sets the bar for the amount that the government 's premium subsidy will be calculated to support . Owning this price point is a key competitive placement for the health insurance carriers in the marketplace . In year 1 this pricing position was usually held by a Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan or a national insurance carrier . In year 2 , many of year 1 's benchmark plans are now priced higher and have been replaced by a new plan and/or insurance carrier as the benchmark silver plan . And , in several states , the price leading plans in year 2 are experimental creations of ObamaCare called Co-Ops . These are non-profit programs that fill the role of a health insurance plan but are initially funded with Federal grant dollars . The year 1 track record of the Co-Op plans was mixed at best . Their year 2 positioning indicates a move to buy up market share quickly as the Federal grant dollars have a limited life span . Whether these experiments will be able to quickly develop the skills , financial reserves and enrollment base to allow them to survive independently is highly debatable .
The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- mandated many preventive benefits for adults and children , including flu shots . Typically , any deductible , copay or coinsurance is waived for qualified preventive benefits . This would apply to both individual and group medical plans . Before getting the shot , however , it is wise to quickly consult your agent/broker to verify your benefits for the specific shot you are receiving . If you do not currently have health insurance , you can easily and quickly purchase a plan from an experienced broker or a reputable health insurance website that offers free online quotes with no obligation . Exchange plans will not require any medical questions to be answered .
Whenever you experience a loss , it is best to the claim as quickly as you can . This will allow the claim to get settled as quickly as possible and allow you to get repairs done sooner . If you wait to file a claim , the processing of the claim may take longer as the adjuster will need to verify everything for the claim and some things may have changed with the items involved in the incident .
The best place to get a free car insurance quote is from an experienced broker -LRB- 20 year of experience , or more -RRB- and their reputable website . Why ? Because that 's our job and we do it well ! Customers can quickly get free quotes online from the top-rated companies in minutes . The rates they view will be the lowest available prices and you pay no fees when utilizing a broker . Whether you have current coverage or need it quickly , our job is to help you , and that 's exactly what happens !
That is a great question ! One I 'm sorry that you have to ask ... I 'm sorry for your loss . Each Stat 's Department of Insurance will have in its codes the specified time limits for filing claims , beginning the processing , and for making the payments . You may want to look there for your answer . The fact that your loved one passed so soon after purchasing the policy is always a red flag for the insurer , their first assumption is that there was a desperate health issue that led to the purchasing of the policy , and perhaps some dishonesty in the application answers . That is certainly not always the case , but that is how they treat it . They will ask for Doctor 's statements , coroner 's or autopsy reports , police reports , whatever documentation they need to determine if the timing was coincidental , or expected . Once they 've received all of the documentation , the process moves pretty quickly . I 'd expect the process to take between 6 weeks and 90 days , maybe longer , maybe sooner , depending upon how quickly everything is received . In any case , you will receive a payment for some amount . It will either be for face value of the policy , if they find in your favor , or for what had been paid in premiums over the length of time the policy had been issued , and some amount of interest , if they do n't . Should the latter be the case , you do have the right to appeal , but you 'll need a good lawyer and some money to outlast the insurer 's lawyer and overturn the decision . If you feel that you 've been wronged by them , you have the right also to file a complaint with the State . If you do so , be nice to your agent , because unless they advised you to misrepresent the truth , or have you apply fr something that was n't appropriate , I can guarantee you they had no part in the decision that was made by the company , In fact , they will have been asked for a statement also , and would have had to tell their impression of your loved one 's health . I 'm sorry for your loss , and I hope everything works out for you . Thank you for asking !
The payment for a $ 50,000 Life Insurance policy will vary greatly depending on age , health , and what type of policy it is -LRB- term or permanent -RRB- . A $ 50,000 Whole Life policy for a child may cost under $ 10/mo , while a $ 50,000 Whole Life policy for an 80 year old male who has some health conditions and smokes , could cost over $ 1,000 per month . A 30 year old male who had excellent health and does not smoke could get a term policy of $ 50,000 for under $ 10/mo and a guaranteed no lapse universal life policy for under $ 35/mo . You can use the quote engine on our website to get the prices for other ages and health and tobacco factors . PS I apologize ; I did not see the statement that you are a woman who is 74 years old until now . Assuming you have pretty good health , you could get a No Exam Whole Life policy of $ 25,000 for about $ 175,000 . Or you may be able to get a permanent policy of $ 50,000 for about that same price , by taking an exam . If you took $ 50,000 in Term insurance , you could possibly pay under $ 100/mo . Feel free to give me a call ; I can find your best rate very quickly and will make sure it is with a policy for which you qualify .
Health insurance for a family of four depends on many factors including your age , zip code , health conditions and what type of coverage you want . A temporary plan could cost as little as $ 140 pr month , depending on deductibles and ages . A comprehensive plan , would of course cost more . A top-rated website or an experienced broker can quickly compare the best options and quickly review which specific policies fit your situation the best .
How long have they been around . How quickly do they pay . How difficult are the to deal with and/or approve a claim . Do they have a local agent you can actually see , talk with and meet with . Is that agent actually interested in what is best for you . Do they have the type of policies you need and are looking for . Are they interested in covering someone like you , and with the health issues you might have . What are their rates and can you afford the coverage you need . Thank you . GARY LANE .
The best and cheapest health insurance will be different for each person . For example , if you are under 25 and have a few tickets , a specific insurer may be the best option . However , if you are married and live in another state , a completely different company may be the best option . To get the cheapest rate , I , as an experienced broker , shop all of the major companies so you can quickly compare the most affordable options . Then , you , or any consumer , can quickly determine the company to apply with and secure coverage . The combination of an experienced broker and top-rated website saves money !
You should get health insurance on your baby as quickly as possible . Preventive benefits are covered at 100 % on most plans and since your child is very young , rates would be extremely low . `` Child-only '' plans are not as widely available as they will be in 2014 , but it 's still important to seek coverage . A licensed and experienced broker can help you compare the best plans with the most comprehensive coverage . The application process is very quick and you could use coverage without a waiting period . We always advise our clients to seek coverage on children as quickly as possible to take advantage of comprehensive preventive coverage .
There are some life insurance policies that can be purchased as quickly as one day . When applying for very large face amounts , and/or if an exam and medical records are required , the time that it takes the policy to go into effect can be weeks or months . To get life insurance most quickly , use a No Exam Life Insurance policy and ask the usual time it takes to go into effect , as some are much more speedy than others .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Do You Purchase Renters Insurance ?
I would suggest start by calling local agents in your area . When you find one that you are comfortable with , provide them with the information necessary to get you coverage details and pricing . Some of the information that the agent will need are : the year the building was built , the distance of the nearest responding fire department , the distance of the nearest fire hydrant , the total number of units in the building , whether or not the building is sprinklered or security protected , and amount of coverage you are seeking just to name some of the main items .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
There are many ways to purchase renters insurance online . Most major insurance companies will allow you to purchase directly thorugh their websites . There are also websites that give you access to many different companies at once . However , there are some things that concern me about purchasing insurance online . As a former agent for a top 3 insurance company , I would become the `` agent '' for individuals who had purchased their own insurance online . I consistently found problems and lack of coverage when I recevied these clients . My recommendation is to reach out to a local independent agent and tell them you are looking for renters insurance . This will give you the opportunity to build a relationship with that person and have them make recommendations for certain coverages . There are many additional coverages that are available on renters policies from water back-up , to identity theft coverage , and specific coverage for jewelry , collectibles , music equipment , etc. . It is best to discuss these options with a professional so you know exatly what is covered and how it is covered . While you can quickly purchase renters insurance online , you may leave yourself with gaps in coverage , which can become costly in the event of a claim . The process is not that much slower within an agency -LRB- we frequently put polices in place the same day -RRB- and you can be confident that you have the proper coverages . If you do not feel comfortable with the agent you are in contact with , ask friends and family who they work with and find someone you truly trust . Even though you are purchasing a fairly inexpensive renters policy , take your time to find the right solution for you . In the unfortunate event of a claim , you will be happy that you did .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
In order to know how much Renters Insurance will cost you monthly , you 'll need to obtain a renters insurance quote . If you seek the lowest premium you will need to purchase the minimum amount of personal property coverage , the minimum personal liability and the maximum deductible available ; this will generate the lowest premium quote . In order to provide an online renters insurance quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; a link is available that may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK Please review all coverage details prior to purchasing any insurance policy .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
Obtaining Renters Insurance is simple and quick ! There are n't too many questions to answer and there are just a few points to look out for ! If you are renting an apartment , a house or a townhouse/condo , you would qualify to purchase a renters insurance policy . If the landlord has required you to purchase the insurance , it is important to find out whether the landlord wishes to be listed as an ` Additional Insured ' on the policy ; if so , you would need to ask how the Additional Insured clause would read -LRB- i.e. Name , Address , Account # etc. . . -RRB- If you are simply looking for the Cheapest Renters Insurance , you would request the minimum available Personal Property Coverage , the minimum available Personal Liability Coverage , and the maximum Deductible available . This would generate the lowest premium . On the other hand , if it is your desire to assure that all your belongings including artwork , jewelry , furs and additional high value possessions are sufficiently covered , you would need to speak with a licensed representative to assess whether the policy has available options to extend coverage to provide what you would need ; or if perhaps , an additional Personal Article Floater may need to be purchased . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
You will find renters insurance to be very inexpensive . With most companies renter insurance covering approximately $ 5,000 to $ 10,000 in personal contents and $ 300,000 in personal liability to be approximately $ 150 to $ 300 dollars a year which is equivalent to about $ 12.50 to $ 25 dollars a month . Depending on the carrier this could vary . By writing a renters policy not only are you getting coverage for your personal belongings but you are also getting personal liability coverage . Some companies also include additional coverage such as host liquor liability , which you would need to rent halls for events like a wedding or a birthday . You may also be able to schedule things such as your cell phone which may or may not be cheaper then purchasing the coverage from your cell phone carrier . You will find that if you purchase your renters policy through the same carrier as your auto insurance that the discount you receive on your auto insurance will more than pay for your renters policy . Multi-policy discounts with some companies can range from 5 % -20 % or possibly more , which can save you hundreds on your auto insurance . So be sure to talk to your insurance agent about writing a renters policy and what discounts are available .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
end question
start question
annuities
Who Insures Annuities ?
Annuities are backed by the full faith and credit of the issuing life insurance company . These companies are subject to state regulations . The commissioner in your state works to make sure that every annuitant receives every penny that was guaranteed by the annuity . Annuities can have different types of investment portfolios until the time that they start paying a lifetime income . At that point it is the full faith and credit of the company and they will direct the investments subject to law .
Annuities are not insured by any outside source . They are guaranteed by the claims paying ability of the Insurance Company that issues the Annuity . The best way evaluate the claims paying ability of an insurance company is by their financial ratings . Independent companies rate the insurer to provide a grade that indicated their ability to meet their obligations . Generally speaking a A or better is considered stable . Also , insurers are required by law to invest an appropriate amount of premiums into US Treasuries -LRB- mostly US Treasuries -RRB- , so that they can meet their obligations to policy holders . Since US Treasuries are considered the safest investment on the market , Annuities are considered one of the safest investments on the market as well .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
It all depends on your risk tolerance and financial needs . Fixed annuities are well suited for a conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns . Indexed Annuities are well suited for a conservative to semi-conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns with the opportunity for a higher return than a fixed annuity . Variable Annuities are well suited for an investor who does not mind taking on the risk of loss . A person should carefully asses their risk tolerance and realistically how much loss they are willing to withstand before investing in a Variable Annuity . Annuities can be a great idea depending on your retirement savings needs .
The main risk people face with fixed annuities is the buying power of the payments you receive because they do not have a cost of living adjustment -LRB- COLA -RRB- built in . Annuities offering COLAs are available , but generally require a higher premium to account for the increase in payments . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
Yes , ING does sell annuities . They have a complete portfolio of annuities including : Fixed Annuities - a type of annuity that will pay you a fixed rate of return . Indexed Annuities - an annuity that credits interest based on the performance of an index . Immediate Annuities - this annuity is for someone with a lump sum of money who is interested in immediately turning that amount of money into a guaranteed income stream . Annuities are an important retirement planning vehicle with tax deferral , death benefit , and optional living benefits .
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Who Pays First Medicare Or Medigap ?
Medicare will pay your claim first and will pay only the Medicare approved amount . Your Medigap Plan will pay second . Depending on which Medigap Plan you have will determine if you are responsible for paying any deductibles , co-insurance or co-payments not covered by Original Medicare . If you have any questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap policy , also known as a Medicare Supplement policy is exactly that . It pays for many of the bills left over after Medicare has paid their share . However , they do n't normally pay anything if Medicare does n't pay first . Some Medigap plans also have some long term care benefits added . You should check with an insurance broker for your state to see what is offered where you are . Medicare only pays for a certain number of days in long-term care . Once those days are up , you are responsible for the rest of the bills . Long term care insurance is used to pay for this sort of situation . Normally , it will start paying a set number of days after you begin to need long term care , and continues until you have used up the money in the plan . Medicare and Medigap pay for the first part of your long term care , then LTC insurance takes over .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Cheapest Non Owner Car Insurance ?
Insurance providers are not cookie cutter . In other words there are many variables that determine rates . What may be lower in premium for me may not be the case for your . Therefore it 's impossible to say who has the lowest rates . I recommend you contact an independent agent who can shop various insurance providers for you to find the right coverage 's at the right premium .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
I 'm not familiar with policies in California , and I 've never heard of a `` drive other car '' policy . But in most states , the answer below would not be true . For non-vehicle owners in most states , the driver would need what is called a `` named operator 's '' -LRB- aka non-owners -RRB- policy . Some states also have what is known as a `` broad formed named driver policy '' . Either of these policies will cover a driver who does n't own a vehicle . There is also another rare type of policy for non-owners called a financial responsibility bond -LRB- I believe Ohio is the only state that has financial responsibility bonds -RRB- . But contrary to the answer above : 1 . the vehicle owner 's auto insurance is the primary insurance , and the non-owners policy is secondary . 2 . these policies will not work for rental vehicles because these types of policies do not offer comprehensive and collision coverage , both of which a rental company is going to require . The only coverage these policies offer are liability , uninsured motorist and medical payments coverage .
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance butbe careful purchasingthe cheapest policy . Purchasing the cheapest policy onlinemay cost you severly down the road . For example , a home owner in Virginia recentlypurchased a policy online with state minmium limits . The policy was $ 15 less per month so he decided to switch . Two months later he was hit by an uninsured driver and in the hospital for 3 months . The new policy he purchased did not cover his car much less his medical bills . Cheaper is notbetter sowhen it comes to insurance focus on finding the best value .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Let me add one other use for Non Owned liability coverage . You work in an occupation where the owner of the business is also the owner of the vehicle you use on a regular basis . Non owned vehicle coverage can play an important role in protecting you . Keep in mind that your employer buys coverage to protect his/her interest not yours . If you own an auto , and are faced with an employer providing basic coverage then it is called Extended Non Owned Liability coverage . If you do not own any car then it is referred to as Non Owned Liability Coverage -LRB- not Extended at that point -RRB- Non owned coverage can be a very valuable way of protecting you , your family or guest passengers in your car . Most large employers are not concerned with Uninsured Motorist or Underinsured Motorist Coverage . But you should be . In about 14 % of all wrecks the adverse driver who causes the wreck will have no insurance . so now you need the protection of uninsured and under insured motorist coverage which is not something your employer worries about -LRB- its your life not his or hers -RRB- so , be sure you buy a non owned liability policy in these circumstances and match the UM and UIM limits with your liability limit of coverage
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
The most expensive renters policy is the one that was never purchased . The cheapest renters policy is one that covers your entire claim . Whether it is liability or loss of property , inadequate or non-existing renters coverage is the most expensive . Consult with a knowledgeable agent and carefully weigh the risks . Regardless of what you pay in premiums , a well-designed plan will be the cheapest in the long run , particularly if there is a large claim .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The cheapest car insurance for new drivers will vary , depending where you live and the type of car you drive . But you could easily save hundreds -LRB- or thousands -RRB- of dollars per year by choosing the right company . That 's what an experienced broker will do for you . Shop , compare and find the lowest rates and save time , money and frustration ! LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Top car insurance broker for more than 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
Why is flexible life better than fixed premium life ? ONLY if it fits your needs and you maintain a close watch on your policy . There is no insurance policy that is better than the other . It will come down to what you need it for . How long do you want it ? What do you want it to do ? When you look at a purchase of an insurance policy you will find a wide range of policies and prices . The cheapest one to start may very well be the most expensive if you live too long . The most expensive to start with may actually turn out to be the cheapest if you live a long time . A flex premium policy will require more diligence from the consumer than a fixed premium plan . Skipping premiums or underfunding a flex plan can and often does lead to policies that self destruct over time . A fixed premium policy by it 's nature , is just a steady plan designed for consistent regular premiums . A flex policy gives the owner a lot more freedom , but in most cases , not the best idea . In other words flex policies have more risk than a fixed premium plan .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
The cheapest car insurance for new drivers depends upon where you live , what type of vehicle you drive , how man tickets and accidents you have , and the type of coverage you want . An experienced broker with a top-rated website -LRB- That 's what we do best ! -RRB- saves customers up to 45 % in premiums by shopping and comparing the best available options . So to get the best rates and find the cheapest policy , utilize a broker . It 's free and you 'll save time and money .
Non Owner auto insurance is available through independent insurance agencies . Non Owner insurance is liability insurance for your drivers license . It does not cover a specific vehicle . Insurance always follows the vehicle . The owner of a vehicle must maintain insurance and that policy is primary . If the limits are reached on the primary policy the non owner policy would kick in and provide excess liability .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
What Is Accident And Critical Illness Insurance ?
In the United States , Accident and Critical Illness Insurance generally refers to two different types of policies . The first , Accidental Death Insurance , pays a lump sum benefit to the beneficiaries of those who suffer accidental death . Critical Illness Insurance pays a lump sum benefit to the insured person who is diagnosed with a serious health condition .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
They are two totally different policies . Critical Illness pays if you are diagnosed with a critical illness such as heart attack or stroke or other critical illness . A disability policy covers you if you are unable to perform your job due to an accident or illness . It will pay a percentage of your income for a specified period .
There are a lot of great companies out there when it comes to Critical Illness . Here are a few things you need to pay attention to . The first is the companies rating . This will help you determine the companies financial strength and the ability to pay claims . The second is know the features of the plan . Not all Critical Illness plans have the same benefits . Some offer a return of premium less any benefits paid , some have hospital indemnity and accident riders , and some have a larger scope of coverage for types of illnesses . A few of my favorite companies are Mutual of Omaha , Assurant Health , American General , and MetLife . Each company offers unique features and price points , but these are just a few that are out there . The last factor that needs to be taken into consideration is underwriting . If you have had Critical Illness before most companies will not accept you . However there are a few that will .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical Illness Insurance is not the same type of policy as PPI -LRB- Payment Protection Insurance -RRB- . Critical Illness Insurance pays a lump sump to the insured person if the Insured suffers a qualifying illness or health condition . PPI makes payments for a mortgage or large loan if the insured person is unable to work due to an accident , illness , or losing their job . It might also pay off the loan if the insured person dies due to that condition .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medigap Cover Dental ?
Unfortunately , Medigap does not cover routine dental examinations . Although Medigap Plans are designed to fill the gaps in Original Medicare , they will only pay for Medicare-covered services . Routine dental care is not covered under Original Medicare ; therefore , it is also not covered by Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- . Medicare will only pay for dental services that are an integral part of a Medicare covered procedure . Some exceptions include , reconstruction of the jaw following accidental injury , or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment involving the jaw . Medicare Beneficiaries often purchase a separate dental plan to meet their individual needs . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
No , Medigap plan F does not cover dental , nor do any of the other Medigap plans . If you have a Medigap plan and want to have dental insurance , you would need to secure an individual dental insurance policy . Please note , when looking for dental insurance programs , please please please make sure you look at the details of the programs . Many times I see people buy dental discount plans thinking they are dental insurance plans - they are NOT ! Make sure what you 're buying is dental INSURANCE ! I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately , Medigap does not cover routine dental examinations . Although Medigap Plans are designed to fill the gaps in Original Medicare , they will only pay for Medicare-covered services . Routine dental care is not covered under Original Medicare ; therefore , it is also not covered by Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- . Medicare will only pay for dental services that are an integral part of a Medicare covered procedure . Some exceptions include , reconstruction of the jaw following accidental injury , or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment involving the jaw . Medicare Beneficiaries often purchase a separate dental plan to meet their individual needs . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
A Medigap Plan F only covers a dental service if Medicare covers it . Routine dental care is not covered by Medicare . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . One of the ways carriers differentiate themselves is by offering `` value-added services '' . Value-added services regarding dental are simply discounts on dental services - not dental insurance . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . If you want coverage for routine dental services such as checkups , x-rays , fillings , etc. , you would need to add a separate dental insurance plan to provide coverage for routine services . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , Medigap does not cover non-medically necessary procedures -LRB- e.g. cosmetic surgery -RRB- and items such as routine dental work and eye exams . Individual dental insurance plans and vision insurance plans will cover the latter programs - elective cosmetic surgery is generally going to be paid 100 % out-of-pocket no matter what . Medigap plans pay benefits when you have a Medicare-approved service claim . Please note , each Medigap plan features different benefits so the question can expand from there as not every Medigap plan covers every available Medigap benefit . For example , plan F covers each Medigap benefit at 100 % from day 1 -LRB- and 80 % for foreign travel emergency care , up to plan lifetime limits of $ 50,000 -RRB- . Plan N covers each Medigap benefit at 100 % from day 1 except for coverage of the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 and 2015 -RRB- , Part B excess charges , and you have to pay a co-pay when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to $ 20 co-pay -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 co-pay -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for further help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Routine dental and vision care -LRB- such as annual eye exams , routine dental checkups , fillings , crowns , etc. -RRB- is not covered by Medicare and therefore a Medigap plan does n't cover it . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately or your eye was injured -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . Some carriers may offer value-added services with a Medigap plan such as discounts on some services with certain physicians , but not actual dental and vision insurance . If you want to have dental and vision coverage , you would need to add them as a separate supplemental plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Routine dental care -LRB- such as routine dental checkups , fillings , crowns , etc. -RRB- is not covered by Medicare and therefore a Medigap plan does n't cover it . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . Some carriers may offer value-added services with a Medigap plan such as discounts on some services -LRB- e.g. 10 % of a service -RRB- with certain dentists , but not actual dental insurance . If you want to have dental coverage , you would need to add them as a separate supplemental plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No . Medigap plans do not cover dental care . Some carriers may offer what 's called `` Value Added Services '' which , in short , is offering discounts on dental work - please note , it 's NOT dental insurance . If you 're looking to buy dental insurance , you would need to purchase an individual dental insurance policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap policy and dental insurance coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
Health Insurance and Dental insurance are definately not the same . Dental insurance most certainly is an optional product that can be purchased stand alone alongside any other medical product . Dental insurance always has a specified `` waiting period '' before services can be performed and dental insurance either pays on a percentage of the total bill or it pays a flat dollar amount per service billed . All dental policies have a calendar year maximum that is payable . Some have deductibles , some do not . Health Insurance on the other hand always has a deductible and out of pocket , does not have a waiting period , and does not have an annual cap on benefits . Dental benefits or out of pockets do not have anything to do with health insurance out of pockets .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
No , Medicare does not cover routine dental or vision care . It also does n't cover dentures , hearing aids or the exam for fitting them . However , there are dental and vision plans available and some even cover hearing . A good plan would have immediate coverage for the dental exam , cleanings , fillings and extractions . You should also consider if there is a `` network '' involved .
In general disability insurance does not cover dental work . You are eligible to file a claim if a covered medical condition prevents you from performing the full time duties of your primary occupation . The policy replaces a portion of income , and makes claims payments directly to the insured . If you need dental work you cant submit a claim to disability insurance as you would with dental insurance . Disability insurance will not reimburse dentists for performing procedures . Disability insurance may cover your income loss if your dental problems interfered with your ability to work . This is very rare .
Medicare generally does not cover dental or vision . However , there are certain conditions when Medicare may provide some coverage - this is generally when it 's an integral part of a covered procedure . For dental , Medicare may provide some coverage when it 's an integral part of another procedure , such as procedures conducted during a hospital visit , covered under Part A. Routine checkups , cleanings , fillings , etc. are not covered by Medicare . For vision , Medicare will cover some preventive and diagnostic eye exams such as for glaucoma or macular degeneration . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . You can purchase a separate dental and/or vision insurance plan through an insurance agent/broker .
No , root canals are covered under Dental Insurance Policies , and usually as a basic service . You would need to purchase a dental plan to cover that procedure . Most traditional dental plans cover it as a basic service , with an 80/20 coinsurance after the deductible . That 's where you pay the deductible first , then the plan pays 80 % of the bill , and you pay 20 % . But , before you just buy a dental plan , and go get the procedure , check to make sure what the waiting period for basic services is ... Many dental plans have a 6-12 month waiting period for those types of procedures .
Yes and No . ObamaCare compliant health insurance policies must cover PEDIATRIC dental and vision coverage . This means that dependent children age 18 and under will have some level of coverage for dental & vision care but there is no adult dental coverage in today 's health insurance coverage . In most cases , dental insurance is handled under a separate dental insurance policy even if an individual or group has their health and their dental insurance with the same insurance company .
Original Medicare does not pay for dental work that is part of routine care of the teeth , such as exam , cleanings , fluoride treatments , or fillings . It also will not pay for dentures . Some Medicare Supplement plans will cover some dental work . Medicare will cover oral work that done to protect or treat the patient 's general health , or to prepare the patient for surgery , radiation , etc that will be performed for a health condition . It will also cover jaw surgery for a broken jaw , or follow up to an infection after an extraction . If the dental patient has a life threatening condition , Medicare may pay for the cost of hospitalization but not the dental work itself .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
When To Do A Roth IRA ?
A Roth IRA can be started at almost any age . My nephew is in his mid-20s and he has a Roth IRA . The point of this type of planning is to save money now . Retirement will come soon enough . A Roth IRA will provide you with a tax free stream of income . Even the gain earned by the Roth comes to you at retirement free of income tax .
That is an excellent question ! I am pleased to hear of your interest , as a Roth IRA is a terrific way to save for retirement . I can not advise you strongly enough to start saving for retirement as soon as possible . Yesterday is not soon enough . Conventional wisdom says to retire at your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times your current salary . Please start one soon , and if possible , contribute as much of the annual $ 5500 that you can -LRB- $ 6500 if you 're 50 + -RRB- . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
A Roth IRA is not related to etrade in any direct way unless you simply have your Roth IRA as part of your etrade account . Let 's look at the basic definitions . A Roth IRA is an Individual Retirement Arrangement -LRB- see IRS Publication 590 -RRB- that is generally not taxed if you meet certain conditions . Your Roth IRA can contain a wide variety of financial products including stocks , bonds , mutual funds , CDs , annuities and much more . Etrade is generally considered an online discount stock brokerage service for self-directed investors . You can open a Roth IRA at thousands of institutions . One of those financial institutions is etrade . Whether that would be `` good '' is largely dependent on you and your choices of how you invest your Roth IRA funds .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
Individual retirement accounts -LRB- IRA -RRB- are allowed under the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The primary difference between a Roth IRA and a regular IRA is when money is taxed . Deposits in a regular IRA are deductible from current income tax ; deposits to a Roth IRA are not . In both cases the interest earned on the accounts is not currently taxable . When all the necessary conditions are met , withdrawals from a regular IRA are taxed as earned income in the year received . Withdrawals from the Roth IRA are free of any income tax . There are other differences that affect estate planning and required distributions .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
There are several rules that determine your eligibility to open a Roth IRA . 1 -RRB- You must first have an income . Did you have earned income in the current tax year ? 2 -RRB- If you earned income , did your income exceed the limits set by the federal government ? This income limit changes every year and is depends on your marital status and tax filing status to determine the maximum income . You qualify for a Roth IRA based upon your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You can not contribute more into a Roth IRA than you earned in income . For example , if you earned $ 5,000 for 2014 , that is your maximum contribution . 4 -RRB- The contribution limit in 2014 was $ 5,500 maximum . 5 -RRB- There is no maximum age where you are limited or prohibited from making a contribution to a Roth IRA . 6 -RRB- You are not required to take a mandatory distribution at age 70.5 like qualified IRA 's . 7 -RRB- You can contribute to a Roth IRA even if you participate in a retirement plan at work . Depending on circumstances there may be other rules but this gives you a few ideas .
You should purchase a Roth IRA if you suspect that the rate of tax on your income might be higher when you retire than it is now . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you want to have tax free income when you meet qualifying events . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you want to avoid mandatory distributions and having your distribution taxed as ordinary income . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you are young or old or want to have flexibility when you retire .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is Health Insurance And How Does It Work ?
Health insurance is a type of insurance coverage that pays for medical and surgical expenses caused by illness or bodily injury of the insured person . It can be purchased privately , provided by an employer , or , as in the case of Medicaid or Medicare , be provided by the government . Payments for medical services can either be paid by the health insurance company directly to the health care provider , or it can be paid to the insured person to reimburse them for payments made , or a combination of both . There generally is a deductible , which is the amount the insured person must pay for health care received until the insurance plan then starts to pay . And there is usually a co-pay , which is a % of the health care expenses incurred above the deductible , or else is paid for predefined services for which the deductible does not enter in .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
Title insurance is not homeowners insurance . Title insurance is what a Title company will take out to protect you and the Title companyin-casethe Title is not clean . Here is an example . You buy a house from John Doe . The Title company does there job and sees John Doe is the only owner and the sale and transfer of title is clean . However John had asisternamed Jane Doe that no one knew about who was also on title of the home and did not approve of the sale . What now ??? This is where title insurance would come in . Title Insurance would pay for any potential loss due to abotchedup deal . Usually the title insurance would pay off Jane to complete the sale since it was already finalized but there are several different ways this could go . I hope this helps to give you an idea of how title insurance works .
There are several steps that a retired person can take to increase their income . The first is to unretire . Retirement is overrated . Working has positive effects on a person and when the work is meaningful it can add years of enjoyment . It can certainly stretch your retirement budget . Even before you retire you can discuss this with your employer to determine if there is some way you can return to the workforce as either a consultant or contract worker . It would be best to determine which aspects of your work you enjoy and what type of projects you want to do . Enter into an agreement to work on those things that interest you . I know a teacher who shows up two periods of day to teach Physics and then gets in his car and drives home . He enjoys what he does and doesnt want to participate in the wider campus life . Sometimes it isnt possible to continue to work for your current employer . In those instances make an inventory of work in which you excel . Armed with that list contact people who need full or part-time help in your area of expertise and offer your services , or contract for your services . If you can not find an employer who needs your talents consider working for yourself . There are a variety of ways to advertise your skills and there are people looking for your talents . If you want to try something altogether new there are franchise opportunities available . These opportunities run the gamut from stores to on-line services and sales . Finding a program that suits your capabilities and temperament should be relatively easy . Some of these opportunities can become quite lucrative . I have clients who are leaving their employment long before retirement because their on-line sales business is flourishing . Obviously working provides income and it also reduces the number of years that you will depend upon your retirement savings to provide income . If you are drawing retirement income this will give you money which you can put into a Roth IRA to fund the period when you finally do stop working altogether . One of the most important things that working does is to allow you to delay receiving social security . For a long list of reasons it is usually to a retirees advantage to delay the start of benefits until they reach age 70 . The increase in benefits is substantial to the worker and to the widow it is amazing . Working provides a great deal of emotional satisfaction and a sense of freedom . Another technique to increase your retirement income is to tap into the equity of your home . Regardless of whether the mortgage is paid or not , you can take out a reverse mortgage after age 62 . A reverse mortgage will allow you to tap the equity in your home . This is a complex transaction and the only transaction that I can think of where an applicant must be counselled by a disinterested party . It is the right move for some , though and could make your retirement more comfortable . Another way to stretch your retirement dollars is to determine what you own of value that you no longer need . If what you own can be converted to cash it might help stretch your retirement income assets . Selling things on the internet is relatively inexpensive and can be quite fruitful . I advertised an accordion on the internet and was besieged with interested buyers . Estate sales demonstrate that there are things that are not being used by the retirees that are of interest to the public . Often cars are no longer being used , undeveloped land lies idle and jewelry lies unused in a safe deposit box . Another way to stretch your retirement income is to determine what services are available to seniors in your location that cost you money currently . Many places offer discounts and sometimes services can be free . Even utilities companies participate in programs to lower costs for seniors . With almost 50 % of retirees depending on Social Security for their retirement income it is very important to understand how you can stretch that income and even increase it .
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
Retirement planning can be seem overwhelming since it involves so many different issues . The most difficult part for most is clarifying what do you want your retirement to look like . Travel , hobbies , charity work , new work ? The point is , once you have clarified your objectives , you can work on the `` financials '' . How much do you need to accumulate ? What vehicles work best ? What about tax ? If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Although this seems like a simple question there are a lot of variables : Where does the 20 year old live ? How does he/she use health care ? What type of health insurance , HMO or PPO ? What metal tier ? Bronze , Gold , Silver or Platinum The best way to answer your question is to suggest that you talk to a licensed and certified health insurance agent . The agent will ask you a number of questions and obtain quotes from various health insurance carriers . The simple answer is health insurance should cost between $ 200 and $ 350 a month .
If you live in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi give me a call or e-mail me and I 'll help you out . This is becoming a mantra with me so here it goes - seek out an experienced health insurance agent and have them review your situation and your options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces . Of course , you can go to some online web sites and there 's always HealthCare.gov that is supposed to make purchasing health insurance so simple . However , ObamaCare , whether you love it or hate it , has done many things but making understanding what you are buying simpler for the average consumer is not one of them . There are many , many fine points regarding provider networks , how the consumer can access care , how different health care services are covered from one product to another , what prescription drugs are covered and how , that even when they are technically explained on a web site the consumer either does n't understand the terminology or just rushes past these important factors while focusing on a few bullet points and the monthly premium . I 've met entirely too many people this year who have come to regret the purchasing decision they made on their own and only learned the consequences of once they needed to use their coverage . So , do n't be that person . It does n't cost you anymore to use the services of a health insurance agent and you are making a decision that could literally have major implications for your personal and financial well being . Why would n't you seek out professional advice ?
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Do You Pay For Renters Insurance ?
The premium for a renters policy is based on its two essential elements , the amount of personal property that is at risk and the limit the company will be asked to defend you in the event of a lawsuit . The location , age and construction of the unit being rented will be considered in rating the policy and there might be underwriting considerations that would disqualify you for coverage .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can You Get Dental Insurance Without Health Insurance ?
Yes dental insurance is not `` health '' insurance in the colloquial sense of the word health insurance -LRB- i.e. major medical insurance -RRB- . There is no requirement to have health insurance before having dental insurance . One can have health insurance and no dental insurance , just as they can have dental insurance and no health insurance . And , of course , one can also have both health insurance and dental insurance .
Can you get dental insurance without health insurance ? Short answer yes . The long answer is you need to really review any individual dental policy to see what actual benefits you get and how soon you get them . Individual plans are often different than group plans in the way benefits become available .
Yes and No . ObamaCare compliant health insurance policies must cover PEDIATRIC dental and vision coverage . This means that dependent children age 18 and under will have some level of coverage for dental & vision care but there is no adult dental coverage in today 's health insurance coverage . In most cases , dental insurance is handled under a separate dental insurance policy even if an individual or group has their health and their dental insurance with the same insurance company .
Health Insurance and Dental insurance are definately not the same . Dental insurance most certainly is an optional product that can be purchased stand alone alongside any other medical product . Dental insurance always has a specified `` waiting period '' before services can be performed and dental insurance either pays on a percentage of the total bill or it pays a flat dollar amount per service billed . All dental policies have a calendar year maximum that is payable . Some have deductibles , some do not . Health Insurance on the other hand always has a deductible and out of pocket , does not have a waiting period , and does not have an annual cap on benefits . Dental benefits or out of pockets do not have anything to do with health insurance out of pockets .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
No , Medigap plan F does not cover dental , nor do any of the other Medigap plans . If you have a Medigap plan and want to have dental insurance , you would need to secure an individual dental insurance policy . Please note , when looking for dental insurance programs , please please please make sure you look at the details of the programs . Many times I see people buy dental discount plans thinking they are dental insurance plans - they are NOT ! Make sure what you 're buying is dental INSURANCE ! I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
No . Medigap plans do not cover dental care . Some carriers may offer what 's called `` Value Added Services '' which , in short , is offering discounts on dental work - please note , it 's NOT dental insurance . If you 're looking to buy dental insurance , you would need to purchase an individual dental insurance policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap policy and dental insurance coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap Plan F only covers a dental service if Medicare covers it . Routine dental care is not covered by Medicare . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . One of the ways carriers differentiate themselves is by offering `` value-added services '' . Value-added services regarding dental are simply discounts on dental services - not dental insurance . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . If you want coverage for routine dental services such as checkups , x-rays , fillings , etc. , you would need to add a separate dental insurance plan to provide coverage for routine services . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
Yes dental insurance is not `` health '' insurance in the colloquial sense of the word health insurance -LRB- i.e. major medical insurance -RRB- . There is no requirement to have health insurance before having dental insurance . One can have health insurance and no dental insurance , just as they can have dental insurance and no health insurance . And , of course , one can also have both health insurance and dental insurance .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
The short answer is generally no , that 's what Dental insurance is for . However , there are several caveats to this . First , the Affordable Care act does require pediatric dental coverage as part of the offer the health insurance plans have to make , so there is now some dental coverage for your children available in health insurance . Check with your current carrier to get the details . Secondly , there is a difference between , check up , filling a cavity , teeth clean etc. and an actual medical condition . For example , if your jaw was broken in a fall and it damaged some of your teeth in the process . Your health carrier may cover some or all of it because it is injury related and part of a larger issue . or is you have a cancer that destroys part of your jaw and teeth , again this is a medical issue and not just a dental one and your carrier may cover some of the medical expenses .
No , root canals are covered under Dental Insurance Policies , and usually as a basic service . You would need to purchase a dental plan to cover that procedure . Most traditional dental plans cover it as a basic service , with an 80/20 coinsurance after the deductible . That 's where you pay the deductible first , then the plan pays 80 % of the bill , and you pay 20 % . But , before you just buy a dental plan , and go get the procedure , check to make sure what the waiting period for basic services is ... Many dental plans have a 6-12 month waiting period for those types of procedures .
Seniors in Colorado can get a dental plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement plan to cover dental related expenses . Some plans even have dental , vision and hearing all in one plan . A good plan would give immediate coverage for dental exams , cleanings , extractions and fillings . Some plans do not have a network so you can go to any dentist you like .
In general disability insurance does not cover dental work . You are eligible to file a claim if a covered medical condition prevents you from performing the full time duties of your primary occupation . The policy replaces a portion of income , and makes claims payments directly to the insured . If you need dental work you cant submit a claim to disability insurance as you would with dental insurance . Disability insurance will not reimburse dentists for performing procedures . Disability insurance may cover your income loss if your dental problems interfered with your ability to work . This is very rare .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Original Medicare does not pay for dental work that is part of routine care of the teeth , such as exam , cleanings , fluoride treatments , or fillings . It also will not pay for dentures . Some Medicare Supplement plans will cover some dental work . Medicare will cover oral work that done to protect or treat the patient 's general health , or to prepare the patient for surgery , radiation , etc that will be performed for a health condition . It will also cover jaw surgery for a broken jaw , or follow up to an infection after an extraction . If the dental patient has a life threatening condition , Medicare may pay for the cost of hospitalization but not the dental work itself .
Original Medicare does not include routine dental care . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan , some plans will include basic dental care . If you want a dental plan , review plans carefully . Be aware that some plans are not insurance but only offer a discount if you use network providers . Insured dental plans vary widely in price and benefit .
No . Routine dental services and procedures are not covered by Medicare . Medicare only pays for dental services that are conducted in a hospital - this is covered under Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- . You should purchase an individual dental insurance policy to secure benefits that cover dental care services / procedures .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Humana Gold Medicare ?
This is a good question . Humana Gold is a Medicare advantage plan . If you have Medicare parts A and B , you may qualify to apply . It is a very popular plan . Medicare advantage -LRB- Medicare part C -RRB- plans typically will give you more benefits than having Medicare alone .
This is a good question . Humana Gold is a Medicare advantage plan . If you have Medicare parts A and B , you may qualify to apply . It is a very popular plan . Medicare advantage -LRB- Medicare part C -RRB- plans typically will give you more benefits than having Medicare alone .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
Family health insurance with an effective date of 1/1/2014 will be available on the Silver , Bronze , Platinum , and Gold policies on your State or Federal exchange . The costs will vary depending on how much deductible you choose and your age and the age of your spouse and the age of the children Can you get on www.healthcare.gov ? If so , you should be able to get a quote . If you prefer you can still get health insurance policies from companies like Humana or United Health care and you can just call their customer service number to get a quote
I do n't know what a lot of doctors think about Humana . Humana offers Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C of Medicare -RRB- . Part C allows insurance companies like Humana to provide Medicare benefits . They are managed health care plans such as HMOs and PPOs . Since they are managed care plans they have networks -LRB- doctor and hospital -RRB- where they want you to receive your medical care . Medicare Advantage Plans must offer the same benefits as Original Medicare but they do not have to cover every benefit the same way . These plans can have higher out-of-pocket costs than Medicare for some benefits and are required to limit out-of-pocket cost to no more than $ 6,700 in a calendar year . Some doctors may not like to work with Humana for their Medicare patients and would prefer to use Original Medicare plus a Supplement .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Depending upon your point of view , one could say that virtually all major health insurance carriers are equally good or bad in today 's marketplace . The health insurance industry has been highly regulated at the state level for decades and with the Affordable Care Act we have an entirely new set of Federal regulations for health insurer 's to comply with . So , yes , CIGNA offers excellent services . So , do AETNA , Assurant , Humana , United Healthcare and scores of other options around the nation . Defining how `` good '' CIGNA is versus any of its national competitors is a subjective exercise that means different things to different people . In the new health insurance marketplace of 2014 the informed buyer will have to understand that the insurance carriers have to devise different ways of covering up to $ 6250 in potential financial exposure per person in different plan design configurations and price points . The insurance carriers has to come up with their own ideas as to how to have plan designs that fit into the new `` Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum '' allowed by the law . Right now that can translate into some very meaningful benefit plan design differences between insurance carriers and within the same `` metallic ' tier level . You may have one insurance carrier offering only high deductible plans while a competitor may offer some plans with different office visit and/or prescription copayments and yet they both fall within the range of being qualified `` Bronze or Silver '' plan designs . Upon examination they will find that the various carrier 's first attempts at plan designs have yielded results that are often confusing , inconsistent and can be make it even more difficult for the non-insurance person to see the value differences between various carrier 's plans . This is where you start to come to those intersections of Price , Benefits and Network that help drive a person 's buying decision . At certain price points and for certain of their plan design 's overall benefits , CIGNA can offer some of the best coverage for the dollar in today 's marketplace . The are a nationally recognized brand with an large , national provider network and a growing offering of value added programs designed to keep their members healthy or effectively manage the chronically ill . While no one can say that any insurance carrier is the `` best '' in each and every way and every location . CIGNA strives for a consistency across the large number of various insured populations they serve . I can feel comfortable in saying that CIGNA should be part of your consideration in the individual and large group market segments .
Humana offers both Medicare Advantage Plans and Medicare Supplemental Insurance Plans . Humana Medicare Supplemental Plans do not replace Medicare ; they supplement the benefits offered by Medicare Part A and Part B. Humana Medicare Advantage Plans do not exactly replace Medicare , but they offer the full package of Medicare Part A and B and additional coverage in one package .
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
The shingles shot isnt covered by Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- . Generally , Medicare prescription drug plans -LRB- Part D -RRB- cover all commercially-available vaccines -LRB- like the shingles shot -RRB- needed to prevent illness . Zostavax -LRB- PF -RRB- is a Tier 4 medication under all three Humana Stand Alone PDPs Humana Walmart PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Preferred Rx PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Enhanced PDP has a 44 % coinsurance -LRB- this plan has no deductible -RRB-
Humana 's Medicare Advantage product is a Medicare HMO or Medicare Managed Care plan and I would presume you are trying to compare it to Medicare Supplement policies . In general terms , most doctors are n't thrilled with Medicare regardless if it is traditional Medicare or the new Medicare Advantage products sold by insurance carriers such as Humana or United Healthcare due to the reimbursement -LRB- payment -RRB- levels set by the government . You provide no specifics so it is impossible to give you a definitive answer . Medicare Advantage products have to cover everything Medicare covers and generally offer an even broader range of benefits to their members . However , the trade off from the consumer 's perspective with Medicare Advantage plans is that you must stay within their network of health care providers for your care to be covered . From the health care provider 's perspective they are almost certainly presented with a different payment methodology under a Medicare Advantage plan than the fee-for-service approach they have been used to and they will find their practice of medicine under greater scrutiny for the quality and effectiveness of the care they deliver . In my experience these types of physician remarks usually boil down to manner of payment and control issues . You should find a licensed health insurance agent who sells both Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage plans who can explain the specifics of what each approach does and present each one 's advantages and disadvantages . Your doctor could be giving you good advice for your particular area or they could be expressing their own prejudices .
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans in most states on a statewide basis . In some states Humana also has a Medicare Advantage plan that may or may not be available in your zip code or county . In Georgia the Humana Medicare supplement plan is neither the highest priced plan nor the most competitive .
Yes , Humana 's Medicare Part D plan does cover the shingles vaccine . If you are in the Humana Medicare Advantage PPO plan , you must receive your immunization at a pharmacy that bills Express Scripts directly . Those not in the Humana Medicare Advantage PPO plans must call their respective insurance carriers to see where to get their shot . There will be a copay .
Humana can be either a Medigap or Medicare Advantage plan . They offer both options . Depending on your zip code , the Humana Medicare Advantage plan may not be available . If Humana Medigap plans are offered in your state , they would be available in any zip code . You should completely understand the difference in Advantage plans vs. Medicare supplement . In general , Advantage plans have lower premiums but considerably higher out of pocket costs . Most also have networks with severe penalties for using non-network providers . Supplement plans have higher monthly premiums , no networks , and in most cases , less than $ 500 out of pocket when your health takes a turn for the worse .
Humana is a health insurance company that offers individual and group health insurance . Humana also offers supplemental life insurance for individuals and groups . For individuals , Humana offers a Junior Estate Builder for your children or grandchildren , and a Memorial Fund for people 45 - 80 to take care of final expenses . On the group insurance side , Humana offers supplemental term life insurance for employees or spouses and dependents .
Yes ! Humana does offer Medigap plans . Of the 11 different plans in the marketplace , Humana offers Medigap plans A , B , C , F , G , K , L , N , and High-deductible F - please note , not every medigap plan may be available and may not be sold in every area . Medigap plans are the same from every company because they 're standardized by the government . The only difference between the coverage from each carrier is the price they charge for it . Price quotes are determined by the quoted plan -LRB- s -RRB- , your age , zip code , any tobacco usage , and marital status -LRB- some carriers offer rate discounts if married and if spouses applying together -RRB- . It 's important to compare the rates from every available option in your area -LRB- including Humana and every other insurer offering Medigap plans in your zip code -RRB- so you can secure your desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . If you need quotes for Humana 's Medigap plans -LRB- as well as those from other carriers to compare to as well -RRB- , please give me a call at 888-972-0024 - that connects to my office directly -LRB- not an automated system -RRB- . You can also send me an e-mail by clicking on the `` contact me '' button next to my name . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans and Medicare Advantage in some states . Their Medicare supplement plan offerings are limited in most areas . In Georgia for example , Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , F , K , N and High F . Some of their plans are competitive but there are almost always lower priced plans from other carriers .
Humana offers two kinds of Medicare coverage . In some areas you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan . Advantage plans vary by zip code and may not be available in your home town area . Most people will want to consider traditional Medicare and a Medigap plan . Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , B , C , F , K , L , N and Hi F in Georgia . Compare rates before you buy .
Humana is a good reputable health insurance company . They offer medical coverage in most states and have a very large network of physicians , specialists and hospitals . Their rates tend to be competitive in most areas and they offer comprehensive , catastrophic , HSA and many other types of policies for individuals , families and businesses . You can easily compare Humana rates with other carriers by utilizing an experienced broker . Although as brokers , we include Humana in most quotes , it 's important to understand that they may not be the best fit for all situations .
It depends a lot on what state you are in . Humana does have HMO & PPO Medicare Advantage plans . However , people often confuse what they know about health insurance prior to turning 65 with health insurance after they turn 65 . There are big differences . It is no longer about HMO or PPO . All Medicare Advantage , HMO & PPO are basically in the same category which is a Medicare Advantage plan . It really becomes a question of do you want a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- ? One of the great features of a Medicare Supplement plan is there is `` no network '' so you can go to any doctor or hospital in any state you want . If they take Medicare they will take the Medicare Supplement regardless of carrier .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Creditors Take Life Insurance Money ?
If the person who passed is the one with the debt , and if that person was the Insured person on the policy , then creditors can only take life insurance money left if the beneficiary was the Insured 's estate . If the Insured chose a person as the beneficiary , creditors can not take life insurance money from the beneficiary , unless perhaps the beneficiary was a co-signers on the insured person 's debt .
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and you have a wage garnishment out against you , what can be garnished depends on the rules of the state . Federal law sets limits on what can be garnished , but states can add to those limitations . Consult an attorney if your wages are being garnished and you are set to become the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , or have recently received proceeds of a life insurance policy . If it is the deceased person who was insured by the life insurance policy whose wage were being garnished , or who owed substantial debt , the money received by the beneficiary is usually safe from creditors to whom the deceased owed money . If the insured person left his money to his estate , or there were no living beneficiaries on his policy to receive the death benefit , then creditors have access to money left to the estate . But money left to a person as beneficiary belongs to the beneficiary and is not accessible to creditors for the deceased .
If the person with the debt is the person who owes money to a creditor , then the creditor can take life insurance proceeds if they are left to his/her estate . If the beneficiary is a person , the creditor can not take the life insurance proceeds unless the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debt .
The answer to this questions depends on a few specifics . In many states , a creditor can not take the cash values of a life insurance policy from a policy owner -LRB- this is not true of all states , however -RRB- . For death benefit , as long as the death benefit is paid to a beneficiary who is not a party to the loan for which the creditor is trying to collect money , the creditor would not be able to take life insurance proceeds , unless those proceeds were paid to the policy owner 's estate , at which point in time they would need to be distributed through the probate process , and the creditor would have the ability to file claim against the estate in an attempt to recover monies owed .
If the creditor is going after money owed by the insured person who passed away , the life insurance is exempt from creditors if the beneficiary of the policy was a person . Creditors can not take the life insurance proceeds from a beneficiary unless the beneficiary co-signed the debt with the insured person , or has debts of their own for which creditors are seeking payment .
If the person who passed is the one with the debt , and if that person was the Insured person on the policy , then creditors can only take life insurance money left if the beneficiary was the Insured 's estate . If the Insured chose a person as the beneficiary , creditors can not take life insurance money from the beneficiary , unless perhaps the beneficiary was a co-signers on the insured person 's debt .
Life insurance is exempt from creditors in Minnesota if the life insurance is left to a beneficiary other than the estate . If the life insurance goes to the estate -LRB- either on purpose or by default because all the named beneficiaries are dead -RRB- , the money will go through probate , where creditors can collect on it . If the life insurance is left to a person , creditors can not take it -LRB- unless perhaps the beneficiary was a co-signer to the Insured 's debts -RRB- .
Life insurance must be distributed to a beneficiary and not the estate to remain exempt from the deceaseds creditors . The beneficiaries creditors would be able to go after the life insurance proceeds . Most retirement accounts and cash value within a life insurance policy are exempt from creditors and can be retained , even through bankruptcy . One way creditors sometimes get to the funds is if life insurance proceeds are deposited into what was a joint checking account that the creditor had access to . While a person may be able to have the funds returned through legal proceedings , it is often best to close the joint account and open a new account .
There are assets protected from creditors by federal and/or state statute . Those assets are considered essential for the debtor to maintain at least a financial well-being . Creditor protection is balanced by the concerns for creditor 's rights to access the debtor 's assets . Annuities can be argued as a legitimate retirement plan like IRAs . Some states exempt annuities from the claims of creditors . Each state has differing views and regulations on the claims of creditors . Seek out legal counsel to determine what assets are protected from claims of creditors .
If the person who passed away was the one with the debt , creditors generally can not take the life insurance proceeds left as long as the beneficiary was a person . The money then belongs to that beneficiary , and as long as creditors do not have a claim against the beneficiary , they can not take life insurance proceeds from them .
Creditors can not go after the life insurance payout to pay the debts of the deceased insured person , as long as the beneficiary or beneficiaries who are receiving the life insurance proceeds are actual people . Life insurance bypasses probate , so the creditor does not have the opportunity to access the life insurance payout . If the beneficiary is the insured person 's estate , the creditors may be able to go after the life insurance death benefit to pay the debts of the insured . If the beneficiary is the one who has the debts , then the creditors can go after the life insurance payout . This is also true if the beneficiary shared a debt with the deceased .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Creditors can go after life insurance proceeds that are left to the estate . Probate is the process of administering an estate , and when the death benefit from life insurance is left to the estate , those funds are in the pool , and during probate , creditors will go after their share . If life insurance is left to a person as a beneficiary , that person who collects the money is not generally liable for paying the debts of the person who died . State laws differ and there are variations that can affect this , but the general rule is that creditors for the deceased can not go after the life insurance the deceased person left to you .
If the creditor is going after life insurance proceeds that have been left to the insured person 's estate , and is doing so to pay off bills left by the deceased , then the creditor can claim life insurance benefits during probate . If the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is a person , then creditors can not take the death benefit away from the beneficiary . There may be some exceptions , such as if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debt .
Creditors can not reach life insurance proceeds to pay off the debts of the deceased insured person unless the beneficiary of the policy was not a person . I.e. . If the insured named his/her `` estate '' as the beneficiary , then the policy proceeds go through probate , giving creditors for the deceased , access to those funds . If the beneficiary is a person , the life insurance proceeds do not usually go through probate , but directly to that person . Creditors can not reach the money that went to the beneficiary unless the beneficiary shared the debt with the deceased .
Life insurance proceeds can be taken by creditors if the proceeds go into the estate of the deceased insured person . This happens if the beneficiary of the policy is named `` the estate '' or if the persons listed as beneficiaries are no longer alive . If the beneficiary is a living person , the creditors for the deceased can not go after the insurance proceeds from the beneficiary . If it is the beneficiary who owes debt , creditors may try to access the life insurance money that the beneficiary was left .
No , Life Insurance is generally not subject to Creditor Claims upon death . If you are alive , and have cash value within a life insurance policy , it may be subject to Creditor Claims is you are taking money out of it , especially as a withdrawal . Generally speaking Life Insurance Death Benefits are free from Probate , meaning no claims can be made .
In most cases yes , a creditor can not touch your Life insurance policy or the cash value in your policy . As long as their is a named beneficiary a Life Insurance policy will avoid probate so again , the creditor will not be able to touch the money . If the proceeds are left to the estate however , probate gets involved so the creditors may have a claim after final expenses are paid .
While it appears simple on its face , the life insurance exemption from creditor claims can be very confusing . It is the opinion of some attorneys who specialize in life insurance law that the only way to truly protect life insurance proceeds from creditors of the insured is to have the policy owned by an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . Similarly , the only way to protect the proceeds form the creditors of the beneficiary is to have the proceeds paid into a discretionary spendthrift trust instead of directly to the beneficiary . Obviously these are issues that should be discussed with a qualified estate planning attorney . If you do n't know one , chances are that your life insurance agent will be able to refer you to one . This type of advanced planning may not be justified in ordinary circumstances . However if there is a good possibility that there could be claims by creditors of either the insured or the beneficiary , then the use of appropriate trusts should be considered .
If life insurance proceeds in Georgia are left to a person as beneficiary , creditors can not take the money away from the beneficiary to pay the debts of the insured , -LRB- unless the beneficiary was co-signer to that debt -RRB- . If the life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , then creditors in Georgia can access those benefits to pay off the debt owed them by the deceased .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is New York Life A Good Life Insurance ?
New York Life is an excellent life insurance company with strong ratings and a blue chip balance sheet . New York Life has huge retention for large cases . However , their product line is not competitive in the brokerage community and generally sold by their proprietary agent field force .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
With most life insurance policies the lowest monthly premium they will offer is around $ 15 . The company that is braded as AARP life insurance is actually New York Life . New York Life is a highly rated life insurance company . Many of the life insurance certificates sold by New Your Life will allow for future rate increases so the initial rate MAY only be temporary with that particular company .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
Whole Life Insurance can range in price from very low to very high . It depends on your age and health among other things . We always recommend getting a policy of whole life for a child , to insure their `` insurability '' for the future , at an extremely low cost . As you get a big older , the price rises , but slowly . The younger you are , the better it is to get whole life then , before it continues to rise . With good health and a reasonable age , whole life can be very affordable , especially when you factor in it allows you to take cash out for emergencies or retirement , or to help pay the future premiums . New York Life even offers Custom Whole Life , which allows you to stop paying your premiums completely and keep your life insurance . Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
New York Life is not a publically traded company . New York Life is a mutual company . This means their policyholders are owners of the company versus publically traded on the stock exchange . Some types ofNew York Life whole life policies even allow voting rights and dividends for the policyholders . There are both plus and minus to mutual companies versus publically traded companies .
Yes you can . New York Life frequently provides life insurance to those up to age 90 . Depending on your health , you may be able to obtain a reasonable amount of life insurance . Even if your health is not good , you may be able to obtain a guaranteed benefit policy . Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is It Illegal To Not Have Health Insurance In New Jersey ?
No it is not illegal to not have health insurance in New Jersey . Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 -LRB- PPACA , aka Obamacare -RRB- there will be a federal mandate to acquire health insurance that will result in penalty taxes imposed on income for individuals who do not acquire health insurance . The extent of this penalty tax will decrease over the course of the next several years .
That is a great question ! While it is not technically illegal to not have health insurance coverage , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- does impose penalties on those who choose to remain uninsured . The purpose behind having people insured is to greatly lower the costs of health care . When someone without insurance seeks medical care , the cost for that treatment is passed on to all the other people who seek treatment in the form of higher prices . Insuring them returns that cost to them , and the insurance company . Also adding more healthy people to the pool lowers costs , as there is more money going in , and less going out , lowering costs . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
No . Under the affordable care act , if you do not want to have health insurance , you can elect to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No it is not illegal to not have health insurance in New Jersey . Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 -LRB- PPACA , aka Obamacare -RRB- there will be a federal mandate to acquire health insurance that will result in penalty taxes imposed on income for individuals who do not acquire health insurance . The extent of this penalty tax will decrease over the course of the next several years .
The answer will depend on your individual and family circumstances , objectives and resources . If you are a Breadwinner , or a stay at home parent in New Jersey chances are your significant other will be greatly impacted financially due to an untimely death . Some life insurance protection is better than none especially if you have dependents , or loved ones who are relying on your future income . Some options for life insurance in New Jersey are Group Life Insurance which may be offered by your employer , or an industry association . This is not to say group life is the best in New Jersey , it is just one of a few options . Other considerations are individual term life insurance , or permanent life insurance like whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life .
The states that require Short Term Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York and Rhode Island . A few states offer disability to low income citizens in others ways . California , New Jersey and Rhode Island offer state Disability Insurance or Temporary State Disability Insurance . Puerto Rico also offers a Public Temporary Disability Insurance plan .
There is no one type of life insurance policy , or one particular life insurance company , that is best in New Jersey . Finding your best policy will take into account your health , age , income , the amount of life insurance that you need , and the purpose for your coverage . It may be a good idea to visit with an agency that sells life insurance in New Jersey to find the best policy for you .
Medicare is operated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- , which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services in cooperation with the Social Security Administration , it does not have a central claim-paying office for incoming claims . Rather , large insurance companies , chosen within each state , actually administer the claim payment process . So , from state to state , claim submissions are submitted to different entities . For example , claimants living in New Jersey submit claims to the New Jersey Medicare Claim Office .
To get Life Insurance online in New Jersey , go to a website that offers life insurance in your state . You can input your date of birth in an `` instant '' quote engine to see if a quote comes up for New Jersey , look for a site that offers life insurance in all 50 states , or put your zip code where requested . Once you get the quote . the online agency will guide you through the rest of the process . It is different for different types of policies and different companies . But in the end you have a policy just as if you had walked into a life insurance office , and you will not have had to drive anywhere or have someone in your home to purchase it .
To apply for Medicare Part D in New Jersey , a good website to go to is : WEBSITELINK . There you will find some Medicare Part D plans to enroll in and how to enroll in Medicare Part D plans in New Jersey . They also provide a phone number where you can contact them to enroll in Medicare Part D.
Buying life insurance online in New Jersey simply involves finding an online insurance agency that does business in the state of New Jersey . You can find such resources by searching on line for agencies or agents who do business in New Jersey . You will find several places from which you can purchase life insurance online .
No , there is nothing illegal about being covered under more than one health insurance policy . And , technically , as long as you were n't double dipping for premium tax subsidies on the government marketplace there is no prohibition on an individual buying more than one health insurance policy . This question most commonly comes up in the context of employer based health insurance plans though . What would be illegal would be trying to make a profit from having multiple health insurance policies . When you complete an application you are supposed to report at time of application or when any subsequent change occurs if you will be covered by other health insurance while you have this policy in effect . This is so the insurance policies can comply with and coordinate the payment status of the claim . In no case should your combined health insurance payouts exceed your paid health claims and thy willoften still be below the total depending upon factors such as state , plan designs , network usage , etc. . It rarely makes financial sense to consider paying for double coverage in health insurance . Maybe if your spouse worked at one of those rare companies that pays 100 % of the Family rate and you work for a company that pays all or most of your employee only cost , then , maybe it makes some sense . If you are concerned about the high deductibles , out-of-pocket maximums and network issues associated with many of todays new health plan designs it would be cheaper to look into supplemental coverage to fill in the gaps than to pay for a second health insurance product that would rarely pay out much in claims .
Oxford Health Insurance is a large reputable insurer and is part of UnitedHealthcare . It offers coverage primarily in New York , New Jersey and Connecticut . Their rats are typically very competitive and they have a wide range of products for individuals and families . A licensed broker can review and shop their plans for you .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
Oxford Health , which is now owned by UnitedHealthcare , offers individual insurance coverage in the states of New York and New Jersey . You can apply for coverage by contacting Oxford directly , or be contacting an independent agent that represents the company . I always suggest working with an independent agent , as they have your best interests at hurt , not that of some insurance company that may be their employer .
The states that offer Short Term Disability benefits are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . California offers Short Term Disability that can last up to one year . New York requires most employers to offer Short Term Disability coverage . New Jersey , Rhode Island and Hawaii offer Temporary Disability -LRB- TD -RRB- benefits .
State disability insurance is a government mandated program that many people mistakenly believe they have , but do n't . Only five states require private workers to participate in a short term disability program : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . Forty five states do not have mandated state short term disability . Social Security Disability Insurance is managed at the state level , but is a federally funded program . Temporary disabilities are not covered .
The states of California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island require disability insurance to be provided to state residents for income provision due to non-work related disabilities . Puerto Rico also has a disability insurance requirement .
It is health insurance companies that carry critical illness insurance , so you can go to any business or website that offers health insurance to find critical illness insurance in New Jersey . Anyone answering questions about critical illness insurance on this website would also be a good resource to use when going to purchase it .
The states that have laws mandating Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island , as well as Puerto Rico . Of these , only California offers a policy that is purchased through the state , and only California uses the exact words , `` State Disability Insurance '' in reference to their state 's program . However , at least short term disability coverage is offered to employees in all these states .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Am I Medicare Eligible ?
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You are eligible for Medicare Part D at age 65 or at the same that that you are eligible to enroll in Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- . This is also when you are eligible for Medicare Part C and all Medigap plans , and when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Advantage Plans .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
The answer to your question will vary somewhat depending upon where you are getting your health insurance . Are you a new employee anticipating your employer based coverage ? Or , are you a person looking for a personal , individual major medical insurance plan ? After January 1 , 2014 in the employer based setting and under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act , once you are hired as a full-time eligible employee or your hours are increased to full-time status , then the employer can not have a waiting period that exceeds 90 calendar days from the date you become eligible . So , an employer can have a waiting period of anywhere from `` date of hire '' to the 90 calendar days from date of hire . For administrative and payroll keeping purposes I am finding most employers are opting for a policy on a new hire becoming eligible for coverage on the `` first day of the month following 60-days '' . In the individual health insurance world we do have to keep the new open enrollment periods in mind and how failure to enroll during this annual election period can impact a person 's eligibility for health insurance coverage between open enrollment times . In other words , if you `` just did n't get around to it '' and you 've had no change of life status event since open enrollment closed then you ca n't take out a major medical health insurance policy until the next open enrollment period for a 1st of the year start date at best . -LRB- If you qualify you can take out a Short Term Medical policy to carry you through until then -RRB- Assuming yours is a normal individual major medical enrollment then the following rules of thumb apply to when your effective date of coverage is supposed to be ; 1 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted on or before the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the next month . For example , an enrollment submitted on December 10th would be for an effective date of January 1st . 2 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted after the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the following month . For example , an application is submitted on December 20th would be for an effective date of February 1st . Open enrollment season for 2015 begins on November 15th , 2014 and runs through February 15th , 2015 .
I believe what you 're asking is , while you have group or an individual health plan now , when are you eligible to go on Medicare . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been entitled to social security disability benefits and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits .
You must be eligible for Medicare Part A to be eligible for Medicare Part B . If you do not qualify for premium-free Part A , you must either be a United States citizen , a permanent resident , or another lawfully admitted resident -LRB- with at least 5 years of permanent residency in the U.S. -RRB- when you go to apply for Part B . If you do n't meet these requirements , you would not be eligible for Part B. Also , if you 're under 65 and do not meet the disability or end-stage renal disease exceptions to receive Medicare benefits , you would not be eligible for Medicare Part B .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Since I can not tell the age of the person that asked this question , I am just going to add this to the conversation in hopes that it will help the person that asked the question or possibly somebody else . If you are on , or eligible for , medicare , Botox is covered by medicare for medically necessary procedures .
This really is n't an insurance question as a political one . I can only offer my opinion and it may not be agreeable to some depending on where you live . Do I think gun owners should carry liability insurance by mandate ? Yes , I do . And I will tell you why . Accidents happen . Guns get discharged accidently , hunters and hikers are accidently shot every year . What happens when the person who has been shot , but not killed ? Who pays their bills ? Who covers the cost of their care ? Should the person responsible be able to say , sorry I have no insurance , too bad for you . Someone already cited `` part '' of the 2nd amendment in a post . Let me add the other part , '' A well regulated Militia '' . I am a well regulated insurance agent , which means I am licensed for insurance sales and required to carry `` E&O -LRB- errors and omissions -RRB- insurance '' to protect the consumer . If by accident I were to cause harm , there would be coverage to help them . It 's an expense to me as I pay for this coverage . I do n't mind that much because if for some reason , by accident I created a harmful situation I would want to provide more than an I 'm sorry .
I am not sure what you mean by private insurance . If you are disabled and under age 65 and have been on SSDI for two years you are eligible for Medicare . As such you should consider a Medigap plan or possibly Medicare Advantage . If private insurance refers to an employer group plan , that plan plus Medicare coordinate with each other to pay a significant portion of your medical bills .
Individuals who reside in the United States and Puerto Rico who are eligible for premium free Medicare Part A are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part B . You can notify Medicare to not enroll if you choose . Medicare Part B is voluntary and has a premium . There is also and penalty associated with not enrolling when you are eligible without creditible coverage . A person who is not eligble for premium free Part A but is a citizen of the United States or a legal Permanent Resident that has lived in the United States for the previous 5 continuousyears is also eligible for Medicare Part B .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
You can apply for Medicare up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . You should apply during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question ! You google `` local independent insurance agents '' . Then work your way down the list until you find one you like . I am not a fan of trusting my financial future or the protection of my family to anyone that I do n't know . If I have a problem , I want to know the person that will handle it , and who will be returning my call . I also know that internet sites are set up to give you `` best case '' prices when you shop , that can turn out to be different in reality . A live agent can give you an exact premium price , and details on any reasons why there might be difficulties in getting the best rate . I also am leery of hackers getting all of my information , and am not a fan of putting it out there in the cloud for the picking . There are a lot of things that are good to buy on the internet , but in my opinion , life insurance is n't one of them . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Do Medicare Advantage Cuts Begin ?
Unless Congress changes their mind ... again ... Obamacare cuts to Medicare Advantage will continue in 2014 and later . Every year for the last few years Congress has cut funding in one way or another for Advantage plans . Future cuts will mean fewer Advantage plan choices , higher premiums , higher deductibles , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
President Obama has said many times that he wants to end or reduce Medicare Advantage . He does not believe that for profit insurance companies should be competing with original Medicare with taxpayer money . Part of the funding for the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka : Obamacare -RRB- is coming from cuts to the funding for Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage . -RRB- It is expected that these cuts will increase premiums and reduce benefits for the people on Medicare Advantage and cause many of them to move back to original Medicare . Only time will tell .
Unless Congress changes their mind ... again ... Obamacare cuts to Medicare Advantage will continue in 2014 and later . Every year for the last few years Congress has cut funding in one way or another for Advantage plans . Future cuts will mean fewer Advantage plan choices , higher premiums , higher deductibles , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket .
I think this question depends on who you ask , as this is a politically charged question . As far as I can tell , $ 716 billion was cut from the Medicare Advantage Program . TheObama administration claims the was nota cut , because they were going to reduce payments for hospital services , skilled nursing services , hospice and other Medicare services . Of course , that was met with a lot ofnegative feedback on both sides of the aisle soit 's unclearif those cuts are actually going to take place . But if the cuts do n't take place , how would the $ 716 billion bepaidback into the Medicare fund?To some extent , the jury is still out on this one .
That is an excellent question ! According to the latest that I have read , The cuts that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- have mandated are not expected to affect the services provided in any significant way . The cuts are being made in inflated overhead costs , and in benefits paid to health providers who have high rates of return patients . -LRB- ones who were not well when released , or who picked up infections from their hospital stay , most commonly -RRB- . There undoubtedly will be some providers who will close shop , as they will see significant cuts if they are inefficient , or ineffective in the treatment they provide , and some that were being fraudulent to begin with . Overall , the consensus seems to be that no services will be greatly affected , that billing procedures will be streamlined and improved , and that patients will receive better care . Thanks for asking !
According to Heritage.org , Obamacare cuts $ 716 billion from Medicare from 2013 - 2022 . Most of the cuts come in the form of reduced payment for hospital services -LRB- $ 260 billion -RRB- , reduced funding for Medicare Advantage -LRB- $ 156 billion -RRB- and reduced payment to charity hospitals -LRB- $ 145 billion -RRB- . All of these cuts combined mean limited access to medical providers , fewer Advantage choices , higher Part D premiums and higher Part D out of pocket .
The cuts are real , and from what I see , the carriers are working to cut their costs in some creative ways . This can be a benefit for those among us that have neglected their health and fitness , or just need a little boost . For instance , fitness programs can now be an included benefit in Medicare Advantage Plans . Some carriers are giving gift cards to get your screenings done . Smoking and obesity education are often available . Yes , a more fit population lowers the cost for the carrier , but so what ! Why not take advantage of their programs , take some initiative and get some healthier life choices . Life is not a dress rehearsal , so make the most of your life by being as healthy as your age and abilities allow . Check out these new benefits , or call your agent to find out what supplemental programs are offered by your carrier . The cuts are not going away , so the healthier you are , the less you will feel the financial pinch of those cuts . Like your mom said , `` eat your vegetables ! ''
Like original Medicare ultimately is financed through your taxes . Medicare pays private insurance companies a set amount per enrollee to administer the claims . The company can then take that money and develope their plan whithin guidelines set by Medicare . If the company is able to provide the benefits with the money provided by Medicare , then you may not have to pay an additional premium other than your normal Medicare Part B premium . If the benefits are more than Medicare allowance allows for then some plans charge an extra premium in addition to what Medicare provides . This is where the danger comes in when you hear about Medicare cutting funds to Medicare Advantage . Right now there are some very good zero premium plans available . These may be forced to go away if cuts are allowed to continue .
That is a great question ! There is an awful lot of misinformation , political manipulation , and muddying of the facts , so it 's really hard to see exactly what is going on . There are some good and bad things that the ACA does with its association with Medicare , and I 'll let you decide which is which . First off is you do not have any changes to your current plan , nor is it even legal for someone to tell you that you have to drop your current plan and try to enroll youin the marketplace . All current plans are grandfathered . One thing the ACA does is close the `` donut hole '' in coverage in Medicare part D . It will eventually phase out the patient cost until it becomes just the usual co-pay , increasing the likelihood that seniors will be able to afford their medications . It also expands coverage by making checkups and wellness visits -LRB- preventative care -RRB- not subject to deductible or co-pays . It does have cuts of $ 716 billion to the Medicare , mostly in the MedicareAdvantage plans that are run by private insurers . We are told that those cuts are to come from reduction in fraud , provider overpayments , and administration overhead . We are also told that the money from those cuts are being reinvested into the Medicare system , and that those reinvestments are expected to keep Medicare 's trust fund solvent until 2029 , an extra 12 years . It will also make cuts to hospitals that have higher return rates of patients by cutting the Medicare payments to those hospitals that are providing the least quality care . -LRB- Interestingly enough , that was a lead story on our news channel tonight , measuring the number of patients who returned to their hospital after treatment for infections that they got while in the hospital before their release . -RRB- Those are the bare bones of what the effects are supposed to be . How it will actually play out is anyone 's guess . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
I am not sure if Medicare Advantage plans will ever be eliminated , however , they are having serious cuts to the benefits and doctors that are available . Many people get excited about these plans because the low premium but the number that is most important is the `` max out of pocket '' cost . That is the number you will pay out of pocket on an annual basis . There has been a lot in the news lately about the benefits of Advantage plans changing and the 100 's of providers that will no longer be in the network in any given area . Medicare Supplement plans have less out of pocket costs and the benefits can not change from year to year . In addition , not having a `` network '' to deal with allows you to go to anyone you want and not wondering who will get cut from the network next year .
Medicare Part C , also called Medicare Advantage is a product that was developed originally back in the 90 's -LRB- called Medicare + Choice -RRB- to help cut costs for Medicare . It was overhauled in 2003 to the product that now exists . Medicare Advantage plans combine the benefits of Medicare Part A and Part B into a single program operated by a private insurance company . The funds for this program come from Part A and B premiums and often an additional premium from the patient . It is structured like most commercial plans with a copay or coinsurance for different types of visits , a maximum out of pocket expense , etc. . . Some plans do not have prescription benefits . These are called MA plans . Others , MAPD plans , have a prescription plan built in . Talk to a local insurance agent to find out if Medicare Part C is the best option for you .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
You can switch your Medicare Advantage plan during the annual open enrollment period that begins in October and runs through December . There are a few other times when Medicare allows you to switch Advantage plans . If your Medicare Advantage carrier goes out of business -LRB- like Universal Healthcare -RRB- you can change to another Advantage plan or return to original Medicare and qualify for a Medicare supplement plan . If you leave your Advantage plan service area is another qualifying event .
They work very well . They work similar to group health insurance that many people have through their employers . The insured pays very little premium because most of the premium is paid by Medicare . You have a network of doctors and hospitals you can go to with usually an HMO network or a PPO network . The HMO is a more restrictive type of network . The insured will pay co-pays and sometimes deductibles . You will have a maximum out of pocket limit which you do not have with traditional Medicare -LRB- unless you supplement Medicare with a Medigap plan . -RRB- The worst thing about the Medicare Advantage Plans is they are very political . They were brought out during the George W. Bush years and the current administration has stated in several interviews that they would like to end them . However their base of senior voters would not make that easy for them to pull off . Quite a bit of the government funding for Medicare Advantage is scheduled to be cut as part of the Affordable Care Act . That could have a bad affect on the program in future years .
No , Medicare has been a single payer system for years . If anything , with possible cuts to some Medicare Advantage Plans , Medicare Supplements will become more popular . There is talk about changing the structure of some of the better plans to allow for more copay 's . Supposedly a person paying for a comprehensive Medicare supplement plan is `` over utilizing '' Medicare . But Medicare Supplements are here to stay .
That is a great question ! As Jason said , both plans have their positives , and negatives . The Medigap plans can cost more , but have better coverage . The Advantage plans are generally cheaper , but can change , and become a disadvantage . They are also the focus of cuts under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- designed to reduce overpayments and administrative costs . There were several large physicians organizations that grumbled about that , and they threatened to drop or cut back services . Whether they actually will , who knows . It might be safer to keep to Medigap . Thanks for asking !
Medicare Part A and B benefits are the same in every state . It 's also known as Original Medicare . If you have a Medigap Plan -LRB- aka Medicare Supplement Insurance -RRB- , your policy benefits are the same regardless of which state you use the plan in . Meaning , if you purchased a Medigap Plan in your state of residence , you can use the Plan and the benefits in any other state as long as you visit a Medicare approved provider . Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -RRB- and Medicare Part C -LRB- Advantage Plans -RRB- are not quite as clear cut and depend on your specific plan benefits .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Do Life Insurance Policies Not Pay ?
If a life insurance policy is put in force correctly , and if the insured person does not commit suicide in the first two years after the policy goes into effect , the policy will pay . Policies in which the client honestly answers the questions on the application with a good agent , will pay . If the insured person omits or lies about a significant health detail that was asked about on the application or during underwriting , the policy could be contested if death of the insured person occurred within two years after purchasing the policy . If a policy is contested , there is still a chance it might pay . Suicide during the first two years that the policy is in effect is an exclusion for which the policy will not pay .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Health insurance pays when someone is sick . Property insurance pays when there is damage to property . Life insurance pays when someone dies . It starts when people decide to get life insurance on themselves , or on others who have financial ties to them . They apply for coverage , comply with underwriting requirements -LRB- which may or may not include taking a free physical exam -RRB- , and then are issued policies . These policies include beneficiaries designated by the owners of the policies . When the insured persons in the policies pass away , their beneficiaries receive the amount of life insurance that was purchased by those policies . Of course , there are different types of life insurance that can provide cash value , additional benefits , etc. . But in a nutshell , that is how life insurance works .
Whole Life is designed to last your whole life . Your premiums will cover the the cost of insurance protection until the day you die , or else pay you the money in a lump sum if you do not die by a certain age . Whole Life also has a savings component that allows you to borrow from the cash value , if you desire . Universal Life also has the components of insurance protection -LRB- death benefit -RRB- plus savings -LRB- cash value -RRB- . But UL can be designed in a multitude of ways , and it can be further adjusted while the policy is in existence . E.g. . You might want your Universal Life policy to have a large face amount when your children are in the home , but then reduce the face amount to simply pay for final expenses when you are older . You have the flexibility to do that with Universal Life . Not only that , but when you reduce the face amount , you might be able to also reduce or quit paying premiums . Or you can keep paying the same premium and cause your policy to build up extra cash value . A word of caution when buying Universal Life . It is called permanent life insurance , but it is not guaranteed to be permanent unless you choose a UL policy that states that guarantee . Thankfully , there are guaranteed no lapse UL policies on the market ; even those where you can `` dial '' the guarantee to make the policy last to whatever age you choose . As with Whole Life , if you borrow from the policy , you must pay the money back with interest to ensure that your death benefit will be paid per the terms of the contract .
That is a great question ! Unlike a whole life policy , which ends when you do , term policies almost always end before you do . It 's why they are so cheaply offered , statistically , the companies rarely have to pay out , compared to whole life policies . So when they do end , you have really only three choices : walk away as if there never was a policy , -LRB- since there is nothing contractually obligating either of you anymore , in the typical policy case -RRB- , hope that the policy has a conversion clause -LRB- one that allows your paid premiums to be converted to a paid up whole life policy with a greatly reduced face value -RRB- , or you renew the policy . If you choose the latter , be prepared for the policy to renew in one year terms , and for the price to go up exponentially each time . They get very expensive very quickly . This can be a real problem if it happens when age or health issues prevent you from finding another company that will write you . This is often the case with the term policies that companies like AARP and AAA offer , policies that end when you turn 80 . With life expectancy now averaging years longer than 80 , and the increasing costs as you age , more and more Elder citizens find themselves out a lot of money , and with no protection . Please be careful when you are looking at these kinds of policies , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The age that Life Insurance ends is dependent on the age that the person was when they took it out , and the type of policy they took out . For Term Life Insurance , the policy ends -LRB- or goes up in price to what is usually an unaffordable cost -RRB- at the end of the term . Therefore , someone who is 55 years old and takes out a 10 year Term policy will have to find a new policy at age 65 . For Whole Life Insurance , the policy ends when death occurs or when the policy matures -LRB- typically at age 100 -RRB- . At either time , the full amount of the death benefit is paid -LRB- when the policy matures , you are actually receiving the cash value , which becomes equal to the death benefit , called `` endowment '' -RRB- . If you quit paying premiums on the policy , or borrow without paying it back , the policy could end sooner without any benefit being paid . This is true for any type of Life Insurance policy . Some Whole Life policies are paid for with a single premium ; as long as you do n't borrow from them , those will be in effect upon death or maturity without paying any more premiums , as will any policy that is `` paid up '' at a certain point . Universal Life operates much like Whole Life , except you can pick an age at which your guaranteed coverage will end .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Why buy private health insurance ? Well , honestly for a while longer you do n't have to if you do n't want to . The choice to insure has been a personal one in this country for some time . If you did not wish to have coverage , you did n't have to carry any . But here 's the rub to deciding not to have health insurance . If you have a medical need and the means to come close to paying the BILL that comes along with treating the need , the BILL will be treated as any other BILL a person receives in their lifetime . That is , if you decide not to pay it and you have assets or the means to pay it , the hospital or doctor will act just like any other entity out there and send you to collections for recovery . The people Hospitals and Doctors `` write off '' do not have the means to pay for a premium . They have nothing of value . So yes , they do get their care without charges . If you have the means to pay and do n't , a hospital or Doctor will not treat you the same way . Besides all insurance does is cover for risk you do not want to self insure for . You can either pay for an insurance policy or pay out of your assets , entirely for now , your choice .
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
Life insurance pays when the insured person dies . This makes it different from other types of insurance that pay while the insured person is still alive . > Health insurance and Medicare insurance pay for preventative , diagnostic , and therapeutic medical care for the insured persons . > Disability pays insured persons a substantial percent of their income if they become disabled . > Long term care insurance pays for the services needed by the insured persons when they are unable to care for themselves . Persons insured by life insurance do not partake of the benefits of their own policies unless they borrow from the cash value in their policies , spend their dividends , or surrender their policies for the cash value in them . Life insurance is mainly to alleviate financial hardship for those affected by the death of the Insured .
With Term life insurance , if you stop paying premiums for over one month , the policy will lapse . To get that same policy back you have to fill out a reinstatement application saying that your health has not changed , and you have to pay back premiums to when you quit paying them . If your health has changed or you are unable/unwilling to pay that amount , you will need to apply for a new policy . There is no cash value and no surrender charge . When you stop paying the premium for cash value product such as Whole life or Universal life , the cash in the policy may pay the premiums until the cash value runs out . If you would rather take the cash value out in cash , or roll it over into another policy , or change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , you must contact your agent or the life insurance company and give them those instructions .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
Term Life Insurance is coverage that will pay out if you die before the end of the term . E.g. Let 's say you have 10 year term life insurance and let it go when the term ends , because you do not want to pay the higher premium that begins at year 11 . If you die midway through year 11 , the policy will not pay a death benefit . In contrast to that , Non Term Life Insurance will pay out for as long as it is set up to pay out . Most people select a non term policy that will last their entire lifetime . There are other differences between Term and Non Term -LRB- usually called Permanent -RRB- Life Insurance . Permanent Life Insurance can have cash values , whereas Term Life Insurance almost never has cash values . You can design Permanent Life Insurance to be paid up in a certain number of years , so that you do n't have to bother with paying premiums later in life . Term Life does not have that option . Some Permanent policies are more flexible than Term . As you might expect , the cost of Term Insurance is usually less than is the cost of Non Term Insurance . It can be helpful to discuss your needs with an experienced agent so that you can balance cost with getting the best type of coverage for your needs .
Life insurance is insurance that pays out when the life of the insured person ends , or when the set time period is complete . All life insurance works by paying the beneficiary when the insured person dies . Some life insurance policies will also pay out while the insured person is alive , if the policy endows or if it returns all the premiums after a set amount of time .
What does life insurance do ? That is a great question . Auto insurance pays to repair your car , home insurance pays to repair your home , health insurance pays to repair your health . But life insurance does not pay to repair your life . Rather , life insurance pays when death occurs . It 's purpose is to `` repair '' some of the financial damage that is incurred upon the death of a loved one and/or provider . That is not all life insurance does - there are many reasons that people purchase life insurance . But it is the basic purpose .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Get A Medigap Policy ?
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best time to buy a Medigap policy is when you are first eligible , i.e. during your 6-month Medigap open enrollment period , because you can buy any Medigap policy sold in your state , even if you have health problems . This period automatically starts the month you 're 65 and enrolled in Medicare Part B , and once it 's over , you ca n't get it again . Medigap insurance companies are generally allowed to use medical underwriting to decide whether to accept your application and how much to charge you for the Medigap policy . However , if you apply during your Medigap open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap policy the company sells , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people with good health .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
The cost of Medigap policies can vary widely . There can be big differences in premiums that insurance companies charge for exactly the same coverage . As you shop for a Medigap policy , be sure you are comparing the same Medigap policy -LRB- for example , compare a Plan A from one company with Plan A from another company -RRB- . Each insurance company sets its own premiums . It is important to ask how an insurance company prices Medigap policies . How they set the price affects how much you pay now and in the future .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
AARP Medigap plans are Medigap plans insured through United Healthcare . In short , AARP partnered with United Healthcare to attach their name to UHC 's products . As Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , the coverage under each Medigap plan is exactly the same as it would be if you purchased the coverage from another carrier . The main way the AARP Medigap plans differentiates themselves from other Medigap carriers is through their premium rating method . Most carriers determine their rates based on the attained-age rating method -LRB- your age at the time you apply with rates increasing as you get older each year -RRB- . AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- are based on the community-rated method -LRB- everyone in an area pays the same rates regardless of their age - meaning an 85 year old is paying the same thing as a 75 year old -RRB- . Please note , the carrier also offers value-added services such as discounts for certain things such as eye exams and also offer a 24/7 nurse hotline , and silversneakers membership . You must be an AARP member to buy an AARP Medigap plan - membership can be attained during the application process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and comparison and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
Medigap is health insurance sold by private insurance companies . Each insurance company has it 's own set of Medigap premiums . These premiums are usually based on the Medicare recipient 's zip code , age and tobacco status . Cost of your premium will also depend on which Medigap Plan benefits you want to buy . The best way to see how much a Medigap Plan will cost is to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . In just a matter of minutes , we can provide you with the insurance companies and premiums available in your area -- and , not just with the insurance carriers you see online . Once you have quotes tailored to your criteria , you 'll know exactly how much Medigap insurance will cost . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Any Medicare Beneficiary who has Original Medicare , with both Part A & Part B Active . The best time to purchase a Medigap Policy -LSB- also known as Medicare Supplement -RSB- is during your initial 6-month Medigap open enrollment period , because you can buy any Medigap policy sold in your state , even if you have health problems . You can also buy during the Open Enrollment -LSB- October 15-December 7 -RSB- . Medigap insurance companies are generally allowed to use medical underwriting to decide whether to accept your application and how much to charge you for the Medigap policy . There are several Medical Guarantee Issue Rights that will allow you to purchase a Medigap policy without underwriting questions affecting the outcome . I can provide a list if you are interested .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It can be overwhelming research Medigap on your own . The best way to choose a Medigap Plan is to work with an independent agent . Trying to navigate the internet is time consuming and actually limits your Medigap choices . However you wish to proceed , make sure you look at a comparison chart and Outline of Coverage for the 10 standardized Medigap Plans . They each have varying benefits . You 'll want to determine which benefits are important to you and which Medigap plan best fits your budget . The two most popular plans are Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Medigap Plan F will cover all the gaps in Medicare coverage . You do n't have to meet any deductibles , co-pays or co-insurance . Medigap Plan G acts just like Plan F -- after you 've met the small $ 147 annual Part B deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F . If you would like assistance in comparing plans and premiums , please contact me . My personalized service is always free .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Life Insurance Does A Stay At Home Mom Need ?
Do you have children ? Do you have a mortgage ? Do you have any income ? Are you planning on insuring yourself , while a spouse works and insures himself ? Do the kids need to pay for college ? These are all factors . If you are married , then what would it take to replace your services to your husband and kids , meaning for child care , cleaning , food preparation , and the things a spouse might have to otherwise pay for ? Typically the amount for such a situation is in the area of $ 300K . Thank you . GARY LANE .
This is a very relevant question because there is not a black-and-white answer to it . Lets suppose you have a family where mom does stay at home with the kids . Tragically , she dies . What is the best possible thing that can happen with these kids ? Really , its for dad to stay home with them . Theyve already lost mom . They are going to need their dad more than they ever have . He is THE parent . Dad may want to keep working and hire a Mary Poppins-type nanny , but that is the second best solution by far . He really should stay home from work to the greatest extent possible and just connect and bond and nurture and comfort these kids through what may be the most devastating occurrence in their life . Obviously , he will need money to be able to afford to stay home . That is what I think is the number one function of life insurance on a stay-at-home mom . This is a hard sell to insurance companies these days , because they keep thinking in terms of percentage of the wager earners coverage , and on and on . But if I get a couple who really want dad to stay home if the family does lose mom , I fight hard to get them a policy to make that happen .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most insurance companies will perform whats called a `` needs analysis '' to gauge how much your family and or surviving children would need in the event of your death . A good place to start is to add up your total outstanding financial obligations , whether it be a car loan , or credit card debt . Then , look at how much you make per year multiplied by the amount of years until your youngest child for example turns 18 . Factor in college tuition and living expenses . This is only a recommendation , an official needs analysis would need to be done to determine the exact amount needed for survivors .
There is not a simple answer to this because it will depend on many factors including what the household income is , what the life insurance is intended to cover , etc. . Generally speaking , the average client will need somewhere between 300 to 500K in life insurance just to be properly insured , but it varies greatly between individuals . The best thing to do is contact a local independent agent and have them look over your situation to come up with a plan that best suits your needs . A good independent agent will be able to get you the correct coverage at a reasonable price as they work with many companies and not just one which is always the best way to go .
It 's going to depend on what you want to protect with that coverage . Factors such as age of the kids , overall debt to the family and new costs that come with having somebody do the things the stay at home does . While there are many formulas I have always started with the concept of what puts the family at zero debt if somebody dies . Then I add for new costs and services with this situation like childcare . Again with any `` how much '' question , there is no one answer , just yours .
This is a very relevant question because there is not a black-and-white answer to it . Lets suppose you have a family where mom does stay at home with the kids . Tragically , she dies . What is the best possible thing that can happen with these kids ? Really , its for dad to stay home with them . Theyve already lost mom . They are going to need their dad more than they ever have . He is THE parent . Dad may want to keep working and hire a Mary Poppins-type nanny , but that is the second best solution by far . He really should stay home from work to the greatest extent possible and just connect and bond and nurture and comfort these kids through what may be the most devastating occurrence in their life . Obviously , he will need money to be able to afford to stay home . That is what I think is the number one function of life insurance on a stay-at-home mom . This is a hard sell to insurance companies these days , because they keep thinking in terms of percentage of the wager earners coverage , and on and on . But if I get a couple who really want dad to stay home if the family does lose mom , I fight hard to get them a policy to make that happen .
Purchasing life insurance as a stay at home mom makes sense in most cases . Just because there is not an income to replace , there is certainly an expense to replace . Having my wife as a stay at home mom for many years , I would not have considered not insuring the risk of her early death . Having a stay at home mom allows working men the time to earn a good living while not having to worry about other things . A stay at home mom not only cares for the children , but cooks , cleans , runs errands , pays bills , handles household affairs and much more . If the stay at home mom were to die , it would cost an estimated $ 80,000 per year to hire child care , a cook , a housekeeper and someone to run errands just so the household stayed intact and life could continue . I would consider your exact replacement expenses and the number of years before the children are self sufficient . Purchase ten times that amount in life insurance . It is a risk too large to ignore .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you were to hire workers to provide all the services that a stay at home mom performs each day , the cost would be staggering . So it is important not to underestimate how much life insurance to purchase on a stay at home mother or father . However , with most life insurance companies , the stay at home parent will only be able to purchase the amount of coverage that is on their `` working outside the home '' partner . Therefore , when you look at how much insurance to purchase for your family , you will need to look at the whole picture . Most people buy enough life insurance to replace at least 5-10 years of income , or financial value , as in the case of a stay at home mom or dad .
Dear Stay @ Home Mom , I agree with David . It depends . It depends on the family situation and financial condition in the event that the Stay at Home Mom would pass away and no longer be able to contribute to the family . Above and beyond the emotional/social value of the parent , there is an economic value that is considered . You may have heard the term `` Human Life Value '' in relation to life insurance . As difficult as it is to do this , it is an attempt to place a monetary value on the contributions of the person who passes away . In the case of a Stay @ Home Mom , the income of the working spouse in addition to the family savings allows the mom to stay home and take care of the children . If she passed away , the surviving spouse would most likely have to pay for day care . So simply projecting out just the additional cost of daycare could be a starting point ... I hope that sheds some light on it , and hopefully that serves as a starting point to talk to a local professional who can help you and your spouse choose the best life insurance coverage for you !
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance should a stay at home mom have ? '' Well if a stay at home mom is the only earner , she 's a single income with children , she needs to look at all the liabilities that she has today . So if she has indebtedness , whether it 's credit card , mortgage , or any kind of auto payments , she 'll want to look at those or future obligations for her children where she may have college education , or retirement plans for them . She 'll want to be able to do some kind of coverage that she can do to protect them in case something happens to them . And remember if they have an ex-spouse involved , you 'll want to make sure that that person also has insurance on them so if something happens to him that mom and the child are taken care of .
When ever I have discussed coverage options for a woman who is a stay at home Mom , we center on the value that her effort and dedication add to the running of that family home and the raising of the children in that home . We talk about the going rate for child care , home maintenance , and all the important things that seem so easily forgotten when one uses that phrase to describe that it means to be a stay at home Mom . We talk about what the impact , financially , it would be if she were to suddenly die . Would her spouse be able to walk into the boss and expect to receive an immediate 6 figure raise ? Probably not .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
When you purchase life insurance as a stay at home mom , most insurance companies will limit your coverage to the amount of life insurance that is on the breadwinner in the home . So start out by making sure that whoever is bringing home the main paycheck has enough life insurance on him/her . Then I would suggest getting the same amount of coverage as he/she has . If the breadwinner would pass away , you would have more expenses because you would have to hire the services you provide . And depending on your circumstances , you may or may not be able to earn as much as he/she does . So take advantage of the opportunity to get the full amount of life insurance that the breadwinner in your home has . You certainly deserve it .
It depends , is there someone who will have to take care of your stuff and clean up your situation if you pass ? In other words , you may be single , but is there somebody who loves you enough to be that person who handles your service , settles your stuff and maybe empties your apartment or home . Usually it 's your mom . The question only you can answer is how much more difficult do you want to make it for your mom ? Is n't losing a child -LRB- no matter what age -RRB- for a mom , hard enough ? Would you want to add to the pain by having her come up with the money to take care of what you leave behind ? Do you want her to forgo wages because of your situation ? For me , as a young man long before insurance as a career came into place , the idea of being single and owning life insurance made sense . I simply did n't want to crush my mom under the burdens of losing me , paying for my service , dealing with my stuff . I know usually somebody will whip out some `` math '' to get you not do what I suggest and that 's fine . Sometimes the `` Math '' simply does n't matter . Your choice .
I was a stay at home mom for 13 years , and most of us moms make that choice because we want our children to have the best and most trusted care possible . If you were to pass , no one could replace you . But you would want your husband to find the next best possible caregiver for your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . The benefits from a life insurance policy could help him do that .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of reasons why your homeowner 's insurance company would ask for your sister 's renters policy . If your Sister filed a claim in conjunction with your Mom , your Mom 's company would want to assess what would be covered under the terms of that policy , and what they would be responsible for under theirs . They may also be trying to determine who is responsible for paying for the temporary housing costs , and for how long that coverage extends under each policy . They may also be trying to determine if some household items were listed under both policies , and filed as claims by both Mom and your sister . Neither wants to pay for something that the other will , if they do n't have to , you know ? It 's a pretty standard practice for insurance companies to communicate between themselves as much is as legally permitted , so that they can make the proper determinations on who is obligated to pay for what , and that payments are not duplicated . I would not worry too much about it . Thank you for asking , and I 'm glad that neither your Mom or Sister were hurt - that is more important than any of their things .
Certainly Mom needs life insurance , I never forget about Mom . I like to ask Dad , if Mom dies today , how much help would you need ? Depending on the age of the children expenses could include a nanny , daycare center , housekeeper , cook and an errand service . I have added up expenses with families in more affluent areas north of $ 80,000 per year . In life insurance the general rule of thumb is ten times that expense or $ 800,000 face amount . This way the money can be invested and used annually to pay for those ongoing expenses .
Does a stay at home mom need disability insurance ? Yes , I would n't argue the need , the problem would be finding a company that would underwrite a homemaker disability policy . The basic element for any disability policy is a W2 or 1099 to prove income . Without one , I ca n't think of a disability carrier that would write such a policy .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is Jewelry Covered Under Renters Insurance ?
Most renters insurance policies provide some limited coverage for jewelry less your deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Jewelry is covered under a homeowners policy . Most homeowners policies have an internal limit to the amount of coverage for jewelry . Under the homeowners policy the loss of jewelry is subject to the deductible on the policy . People are rarely satisfied with the adjustment made on jewelry under their homeowners policy . A jewelry floater is supplemental coverage that can be provided and it will replace the lost jewelry or pay a stated amount . This coverage must be backed up by an appraisal . There isnt usually a deductible on a jewelry floater .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
A standard renters insurance policy does cover jewelry loss or damage , if as a result of a covered peril . However , these policies contain a limit to the amount that will be paid for each jewelry item . The limits are generally $ 1,000 or $ 1,500 for each piece or a set amount for all jewelry lost or damaged at one time by one occurrence . So , obviously you could have jewelry that is worth a lot more than you would receive in the event of a covered loss . If such a situation exists for you , consider buying additional insurance based on the values of the jewelry . This can be done on an endorsement or separate policy . Check with your agent as to your options . Also , be aware that some pieces may need to be appraised before determining the premium you will be charged .
USAA renters insurance policies cover jewelry . However , like most renters coverage , there will be specific limits and exclusions regarding how much would be paid on a claim . With many policies , you can add riders to broaden your coverage or specifically schedule items of jewelry . Yourpersonalbroker or an experienced broker can review with you how to best cover any jewelry you have .
Your clothes and jewelry are covered under a renters policy . They are covered against loss from named perils . Most renters policies have a limit on recovery for jewelry . The key is the cause of the loss . Recovery on any loss is limited by the limits found in the declarations of the policy .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses for named perils . Named perils usually include Fire , Theft , Lightning , Water -LRB- not Flood -RRB- and other acts of God . Unfortunately , losing an item is not a named peril . You would have coverage for jewelry if one of the named perils occurred but even then most policies have a limit for jewelry so check with your agent . A much better solution for jewelry is an Inland Marine or Jewelry policy . These are separate policieswith `` all risk '' coverageso anything that happens to the item it 's covered , even if you lose it .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
Jewelry coverage on a renters insurance policy will be very limited . Usually $ 1000.00 to $ 1500.00 theft limitation . For an additional premium you may be able to increase the limit to $ 5000.00 . What should be done for any items whose value is in excess of this amount is a Jewelry Articles Floater should be purchased in order to property cover an jewelry items . I highly recommend you discuss this potential need with your agent .
It depends on what happens to your engagement ring . Homeowners insurance provides a limited amount of coverage for jewelry and the coverage is for `` named perils '' only . Examples of `` named perils '' are Fire , Theft , Lightning , Water damage ect . A better way to protect jewelry items is to schedule the items on a jewelry policy or also known as an Inland Marine policy . With a jewelry policy your items are covered for a special value and the coverage is `` all risk '' meaning anything that happens to the item is covered . Even if you lose the item or the prong come loose and the diamond falls out .
It depends . What is the value of your engagement ring ? Most insurance companies limit jewelry coverage to $ 1500 - $ 2500 . Check with your insurance provider to see what their jewelry limits are for personal property . If your engagement ring value is higher , then you will need to `` schedule '' that item under your renters insurance policy . Send your insurance company the appraisal document , provide a detailed description of the ring and an accurate replacement value .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
If you are just purchasing renters insurance in order to satisfy the apartment complex 's requirements , you should expect to pay under $ 200 per year . If you are looking for added protection for your belongings , jewelry , and increased liability protection it should still be under $ 400 . Renters insurance tends to be very inexpensive because you are not insuring the building .
Jewelry is personal property and is covered by a homeowners policy . Most homeowners policies limit the recovery on jewelry and many offer a floater that provides worldwide coverage without a deductible for jewelry . There is an additional charge for that coverage . If jewelry is lost or damaged and not included in a floater , it will be adjusted on the replacement or depreciated value depending on the type of personal property coverage elected . The result will be reduced by the deductible .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Damage to jewelry typically would not be covered under a homeonwers policy . Lost or stolen jewelry is a coverage that is provided under most homeowners policies with specific limitations . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage that is provided and any exclusions that may be contained within the policy or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A rider , in this case attached to a Homeowners ' policy , will somehow alter the standard terms and conditions of that policy . One example is a jewelry rider which is used to specifically insure a piece of jewelry to it 's appraised value . Ordinarily unscheduled jewelry can be covered in a standard contract , but the loss causes that are covered can be more limited than those provided in the rider . Another example is a rider to include Earth Movement as a covered peril . This is typically excluded from a Homeowners ' policy but the coverage can be included by use of this rider .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
There are many ways to purchase renters insurance online . Most major insurance companies will allow you to purchase directly thorugh their websites . There are also websites that give you access to many different companies at once . However , there are some things that concern me about purchasing insurance online . As a former agent for a top 3 insurance company , I would become the `` agent '' for individuals who had purchased their own insurance online . I consistently found problems and lack of coverage when I recevied these clients . My recommendation is to reach out to a local independent agent and tell them you are looking for renters insurance . This will give you the opportunity to build a relationship with that person and have them make recommendations for certain coverages . There are many additional coverages that are available on renters policies from water back-up , to identity theft coverage , and specific coverage for jewelry , collectibles , music equipment , etc. . It is best to discuss these options with a professional so you know exatly what is covered and how it is covered . While you can quickly purchase renters insurance online , you may leave yourself with gaps in coverage , which can become costly in the event of a claim . The process is not that much slower within an agency -LRB- we frequently put polices in place the same day -RRB- and you can be confident that you have the proper coverages . If you do not feel comfortable with the agent you are in contact with , ask friends and family who they work with and find someone you truly trust . Even though you are purchasing a fairly inexpensive renters policy , take your time to find the right solution for you . In the unfortunate event of a claim , you will be happy that you did .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Get Life Insurance With Lupus ?
Yes , you can almost always get life insurance while having lupus . If your lupus is severe enough to cause kidney damage , anemia , pleurisy , pericarditis , or brain dysfunction , you will most likely need to take a simplified or guaranteed issue policy . If it is mild , you can get medically underwritten life insurance at reasonable rates .
Almost all people with lupus are able to get some type of life insurance policy . Mild , well controlled , systemic lupus alone should not keep you from getting any amount for which you are financially qualified . If you have had recent flare ups , are on steroids , or have complications from your lupus , you may need to take a nonmed policy . There are some no exam policies that do not ask about lupus , and that have reasonable rates . Contact a good impaired risk life insurance agent that carries lots of choices for those with health conditions , and you should be able to get affordable life insurance while having lupus .
Yes , someone with lupus can get life insurance . While the most common , Systemic Lupus Erythematosus -LRB- SLE -RRB- is generally considered the most serious type of lupus . Mild systemic lupus that has been effectively controlled or in remission for several years can be rated Standard by some carriers . If there have been recent flare ups , the policy could be table rated or you may have to use a No Exam option . But there are options available . Other types of lupus than SLE will not have a significant impact on life insurance rates .
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
Yes , you can get life insurance with lupus , although the rates will vary a lot depending on the type of lupus you have , and severity of your symptoms . Systemic Lupus Erythematosus is the most common , yet the most serious , because it can affect internal organs . However , if SLE is very mild , it can qualify for rates as good as standard or low table ratings . Advanced lupus that is affecting bodily function will probably not be approved for a medically underwritten life insurance policy , but there are simplified and guaranteed issue policies that you may still be able to purchase .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have lupus ? Well , it depends upon some of the answers to these questions . The first is , I need to know the date it was first diagnosed . And then , what type of lupus was diagnosed ? Was it systemic ? Was it discoid lupus or drug induced SLE ? I 'll also need to know , is it in remission , or is it currently present ? Then I need to go through this checklist . Do I have low blood count , neurological disorders , protein issues , high blood pressure , lung involvement , heart involvement , renal insufficiency or failure altogether ? Is the insured taking any medications ? All these areas will give us an idea of how to price and get an offer from a specific carrier that is really benevolent in their underwriting when it comes to lupus .
If your lupus is mild and in remission , you can get a medically underwritten life insurance policy rated as good as Standard . The type of lupus , number of years you have had it , medications taken , and flare ups will all enter into the rating . If you have SLE -LRB- systemic lupus erythematosus -RRB- that has attacked organs , you may need to get a simplified or guaranteed issue policy .
An individual with systemic lupus -LRB- SLE -RRB- that has been in remission for an extended period of time can possibly get a table rated policy , depending on their full medical history . This would be a medically underwritten policy , and not graded -LRB- rather , it would pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for death by any reason except suicide in the first two years -RRB- . If a medically underwritten policy is unavailable , they can get simplified or guaranteed issue life insurance , which would probably be graded in the first few years of the policy . The less common types of lupus -LRB- discoid , drug-induced , and neonatal lupus -RRB- are generally less serious , and can have normal life insurance ratings .
The common rating I have found for persons with mild lupus is Standard . If lupus has been in remission for many years , the rating might be as good as Preferred . If there has been a recent flare up , if labs are abnormal or your lupus has a poor history of control , or if it has attacked some organs , there may be a need to use a simplified issue policy . Still , there is usually life insurance available for all types and severity of lupus .
There are two types of Lupus - systemic and non-systemic . Most insurance companies will decline systemic Lupus , but there are several that will accept people with non-systemic Lupus . Often , these plans may be graded , meaning you would n't get the full benefit immediately , but after a few years it would be full value . There are also guaranteed issue insurance plans that can provide some coverage . A licensed broker can help you find a plan that will be the best for your situation .
Yes , you can almost always get life insurance while having lupus . If your lupus is severe enough to cause kidney damage , anemia , pleurisy , pericarditis , or brain dysfunction , you will most likely need to take a simplified or guaranteed issue policy . If it is mild , you can get medically underwritten life insurance at reasonable rates .
You can get health insurance if you have Lupus . Under the Affordable Care Act legislation , pre-existing conditions are covered under new Marketplace plans during Open Enrollment . Our job , as experienced health insurance brokers , is to find the plans that best meet customer needs , and compare the most affordable options . Treatment of Lupus is complex and it 's important to minimize your out of pocket expenses . Broker websites will provide you the lowest available rates and unbiased and accurate information . The . gov website has a history of glitches and security concerns .
Life insurance is based upon the law of large numbers . Hundreds of thousands of people have died with Lupus . From that experience companies can evaluate the effect that Lupus has on individuals . The medical information available to an underwriter will help them categorize the extent of the risk . The company actuary will have determined the statistical risk . In combination a premium can be developed for all but the most extreme risks .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
You can get health insurance if you have Lupus . Thanks to the ACA legislation , during Open Enrollment , no medical questions are asked and most persons qualify for guarantee-issue plans . Also , a federal tax subsidy is available that could drastically reduce your rates . As an experienced health insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience , I handle situations and medical conditions such as this on a daily basis .
That is a great question . As the fine folks above me have said , your luck at finding a policy may depend upon your Lupus . I really think that finding an experienced independent agent can make the difference for you . An independent agent can shop several companies for you , and find a better fit . The problem for you will lie in the Guaranteed issue policies , if that is the route you end up having to take . Some can be pricey , and the trick is to find the shortest grade with the highest possible return for you during it . If you would like some more help , please contact me , and I 'll make some time to go over this privately with you . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Life insurance underwriting protocols are different from company to company when it comes to Lupus . Most underwriters are looking to see what precautions or ongoing management of the disease the patent is performing , cited in the attending physicians statements . Common underwriting points of interest are the age of diagnosis , Course of the disease , the degree of control , treatment regimen and ancillary medical conditions , even smoking status . Depending upon your specific situation , you may be a candidate for life insurance .
The rate that a company charges for a given age is determined by the mortality rate for that particular group . This group then is considered normal or standard . The underwriter is the person at the insurance company that determines if the particular risk , you , are standard . If your particular case is considered different than a standard risk , you might be offered rated insurance . This rating might be inconsequential , or it might be severe . In any case it uses available medical information and statistics to assign an appropriate rate . There are companies that will accept Lupus . You might have to contact a few to determine the best possible offer but by all means get into the process . Not having the insurance is a great deal more expensive .
Under the Afforable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance due to a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue - this includes lupus . You have the option to secure a bronze , silver , gold , or platinum level plan - please note , not every carrier offers a plan under each level -LRB- e.g. company XYZ may only offer bronze , silver , and gold plans , but not platinum plans -RRB- . Individuals under age 30 also have the option of securing a catastrophic plan . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look into plans ON the health insurance exchanges . If you do n't qualify for one , you may want to look into plans OFF the exchanges as you will generally have more options available to you . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker if you 're looking for coverage or want to review your existing insurance to see if a better option is available . Insurance brokers have an in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you determine the plan that 's going to best serve your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further help . Thanks very much .
Yes . I have done it . It takes some diligence and finesse . The key is finding an underwriter with a very high comfort level with this condition . The fact of the matter is that different insurance companies have preferences for underwriting different kinds of risks . The distributor I use must have a very strong connections with companies that like to underwrite lupus . Once I have this leverage , I have to make sure that all the quote data I collect is thorough and accurate . If the client is willing to work with me , and go through full disclosure , and cooperate with obtaining medical records , then we can put together a very strong case that you are not only eligible for coverage , but that underwriting guidelines could and should be applied aggressively .
end question
